Hey everyone! Hey colleague, if you can
please take your seat. We'll start in a few
seconds. Well, so I hope you had a very
fruitful discussion in the morning and
a breakout. I had the chance to go around
the rooms and I found all of them were
very engaging. So welcome in this
afternoon session of our conference. We
have this time we have four fantastic
panel that we have planned for you. We're
gonna go through multiple really
interesting topics. We're gonna go through
open source and AI. That's the first one
we're starting with and then moving to
open data, then open source and DPI, and
then closing with a very interesting one
about governance from national level to
the communal level. We're very excited to
have you here with us. Just a couple of
before we get through our first keynote
here, some housekeeping rules. There are
in each table there are those QR codes.
These are for you to give us feedback
about the sessions. Please you'll find
them there somewhere at the end of the
table. We want to hear from you like the
coffee and the break are here just because
last year somebody said it. So
please if you want more coffee, otherwise
there's no coffee next year. So please
yeah, tell us we want to hear from you. We
want to improve it. We want to make it
better. That's first one, second one.
There's where you had coffee earlier. There's
still gonna be coffee for the whole
afternoon till 4 p.m. So please help
help yourself. Third housekeeping rule is
about at the at six at six when we
finish here. There's a we planned a small
reception here at the cafeteria
we're at the fourth floor where all of you
had some of you might have had lunch.
So the problem is that there's a limited
attendance. I remember there was if I
there was an email that went yesterday and
a lot of you registered. So those WHO
registered they have priority but then
those WHO didn't register please let's
see how we're gonna do. Hopefully we'll
have enough space for everyone but
they're strict about about the capacity of
the room and we cannot go
beyond the capacity of the room. So
hopefully everything will work out but
please priority for those WHO WHO have
registered. So this is my small house
keeping rules that now we want to start
the afternoon with our leads for the
morning sessions. A lot of ideas were
shared a lot of lessons learned a lot of
discussion fantastic discussion took
place. So here when I give two minutes
really two minutes for each lead of each
session if they could share with us the
main ideas that were discussed and the
main take from that. So let me start with
my good friend Vipur from UNICEF WHO had
WHO shared WHO led this the session
on open source and humanitarian Vipur.
Thank you Omar. I want to start by
thanking Cassie Dominique for helping
structure the session. They were running
the show and I also want to thank Geard
for taking amazing note that I'll be
sharing with a lot of you. So please find
me if you also want the notes a
detailed note of all of this session. We
came together to explore what makes
humanitarian software how does it differ
from normal FOS what challenges are
unique to the space and what it takes to
support or sustain this missing
critical software. The key insights to
summarize in a minute is there is plenty
of overlap between FOS and HFOS. There are
real cost like infrastructure
adoption customization and trust. Free as
in free puppy still stands for HFOS.
Sustainability is still the biggest
surprise challenge. There is often
funding for piloting or polished solution
but there's lack of the messy
middle the value of death. Many projects
don't survive long term because there
is no support in that area. We discussed
use cases that go beyond
emergencies. We discussed education,
mental health, privacy and government
services. Many examples were discussed
many funding models were discussed and
how to sustain and how to solve certain
things. We have a list of people WHO
want to continue following on the
conversation after this. So thank you.
Thank you for the opportunity and that was
the breakout room one.
Thank you. Thank you very much to Vipul.
Breakout room number two about setting up
effective governmental OSPO so give the
floor to Michael Downey from UNDP WHO
led that session. Michael. Thank you Omar
and thank you to the standing room only
crowd that we had in our room. Very
tightly packed for an interactive
discussion but we really appreciate the
lively conversation that we had featuring
the two OSPO's under development both in
the Republic of Kenya and the Republic
of Trinidad and Tobago that you heard
about in the first session. We also heard
from the OSPO in France. Bastian thank you
for chiming in as well as from my
colleague at the ITU David Mansett WHO
spoke about our overall program the
open source ecosystem enabler funded by
the European Commission that is funding
this development of these pilots and
hopefully a replicable network of OSPO's
throughout the global south. We gained
quite a few insights here and they
really focused on what many may think are
common sense approaches but things
are critical nevertheless and one of those
is that these things must be built
in collaboration with the rest of the
ecosystem the tech ecosystems that are
already nascent and active in all of the
countries that we're working in namely
working closely with the academic sector
and the tech communities that are already
established there and that's something
that underscores the work in our pilot
OSPO's as well. We also highlighted the
need for sustainability of these efforts
that we can't just live on pilots part of
the work of those pilots need to be to
understand the long-term financial
viability and how to demonstrate value to
the government for the investments needed
to coordinate open source related work
throughout the government in terms of
public sector innovation but also through
strengthening the ecosystems that are
leveraging open source and then finally
and this will all share a link here in a
moment with everyone to be ready to write
this down we announced something called
the public sector OSPO network which is
a facility for us to reach out to each
other connect OSPO's that are serving
the public sector communicate and learn
from each other and you can find that
online the URL is FLOSS F-L-O-S-S-P-S-O as
in public sector OSPO's dot network so
you can sign up learn about it add your
information and get connected so
thank you again to all of our participants
we learned a lot please if I
could have colleagues from Kenya and
Trinidad and Tobago maybe rave their
hand in the air if you're interested in
talking more please reach out to them
they're here through the rest of the week
thank you thank you very much and
thank you very much to you and DP ITU for
leading the session I see Mike David
Mansett is over there please also say hi
to him third session we had is about
inner sourcing and we have with us Daniel
from the inner sourcing commons
foundation Daniel two minutes yeah so
thank you first for having this
opportunity of discussing about about the
inner source so first we set up the
scene about bringing the context of what
inner sources which is the application
of open source way of working model and
collaboration within public entities
public administrations corporations etc I
had the pleasure to do so the stage and
and bring voices from private companies as
Mercedes and boss public
administration of the tax authorities from
the Netherlands research and including
for instance a public service as the BBC
so they were all serving together with
the rest of the attendees some thoughts
that I would like to share now first of
all I will I will start with some of the
challenges in this journey into the
open source basically it's about the
mindset and culture most of the cases is
mainly about how to bring this way of
working internally from a cultural
perspective in organizations is there are
challenges related to discover
reality and documentation technological
platforms legal and policy hurdles so
there are many of them related to transfer
pricing and so on so forth
middle management keeps being one of the
main issues in terms of adopting open
source way of working and practices in
corporations and then all in all to say
that there is a two ways of adopting inner
source effectively according to
experiences sir which are first top-down
and bottom-up approach so basically
air cover and ground cover so we need a
chief level and basically developers to
buy in we need to define clear policies
and manifest those things as for
instance the start in as an experiment
early involvement of legal teams and
council and focus on basically on defining
good practices and and clear
policies it's good it's good in in this
journey recognizing contributions and
choosing the right people as well are good
are good things all in all to say
that you can find more information and
tools and resources at the inner source
commons.org and thank you all for your
time this days and fortunately I'm not
sure if our stories here in the room so I
think we skipped the fourth the
fourth breakout room again thank you
everybody for participating it's a new
format that we're adding this year that we
want to hear from you we want
everybody to be able to engage and seeing
from what happening in the room it's a
big success tomorrow we're having the same
format again we're having twice
three breakout rooms so we want tomorrow
we you get tomorrow we're
gonna make you work tomorrow we you
everybody here is working there's no
free breakfast we don't have free
breakfast by the way but we have free
coffee there's no free coffee so now it's
just to let you know my colleague
Mitusha Kazandran will be will be motorem
seeing the rest of the of the
afternoon but I want to now launch the
first panel of our afternoon which is
about open source and AI open source and
AI and we have now as a keynote for this
panel mr. Jan Lucun WHO's the chief
scientist from Meta WHO's gonna address
us through video message
hello everyone my name is Jan Lecaro and
I'm the chief AI scientist at Meta I'm
honored to be speaking today at the UN
open source suite if future AI is not
just about technology it's about how we
choose to design develop and deploy AI
systems that benefit humanity as a whole
admit that we've been committed to open
science and open source from the very
beginning or fundamental AI research lab
fair has been pushing the boundaries of
what's possible with AI so we didn't get
their own we've relied on the
contributions of countless researchers
developers and practitioners around the
world WHO have shared their work openly
and collaboratively the truth is AI is not
a zero-sum game when we share our
research and our code we don't lose value
we create more value for everyone that's
where across meta we've released over a
thousand open source libraries models
data sets and more we believe that by
working together we can accelerate
progress and achieve far more than we
could alone the benefits of open source
are well documented and pleased to be
speaking to an audience that recognizes
its transformative potential in driving
innovation and progress it feels like
scientific research open source has
enabled rapid progress driven by
collaboration and competition among
researchers and experts it's also was
following the current wave of AI
entrepreneurship and economic growth or
lambda models have been an infection point
in the industry and have been
downloaded over 1.2 billion times and
enterprises businesses and developers
submit or lambda model core to their
platforms now some people might say that
open source is a nice to have but not a
must-have but I disagree open source is
a crucial element of ensuring AI benefits
for everyone by making
research and technology available to
everyone we're creating a global
community that can build upon our work
improve it and push the boundaries even
further driving innovation promoting
transparencies and fostering a more
equitable distribution of AI benefits take
on our models for example we
release them as open source and they've
become a foundation for countless
applications from medical diagnosis tools
to support farmers with personalized
crop recommendations progress in science
and because they are open source
anyone can use them modify them and
improve them to fit their businesses or
research needs but the benefits of open
source AI models goes go far beyond just
accelerating innovation by making these
models publicly available we can first
democratize access to AI open source
models can be used by anyone regardless
of their resources this means that small
businesses startups individuals can
compete with larger corporations living in
the playing field and bringing AI
benefits to regions not traditionally home
to engineering clusters second
foster collaborations and community
engagement open source AI models encourage
collaboration and community engagement
developers and researchers can work
together to improve the models share
knowledge and advance the field third
drive economic growth and job creation
open source AI models can lead to new
businesses new business opportunities job
creation and economic growth by
providing access to cutting edge
technology for everyone we can look new
markets and industries advanced scientific
research and discovery open
source AI models can be used in scientific
research to accelerate
discovery and improve our understanding of
complex phenomena advancing scientific
discovery and improving people's lives in
domains like material science in
physics in biology and medicine improve
transparency and accountability when AI
models are open source we can see exactly
how they work and identify
potential errors this leads to more
trustworthy and reliable AI systems and
promotes accountability and transparency
in AI development so what does this mean
for the future AI it means that we need to
prioritize openness transparency and
collaboration we need to recognize that AI
is not just a tool it's a
platform for social change and we need to
ensure that the benefits of AI are
distributed equitably so that everyone can
participate in benefits this
requires a concerted effort from all the
stakeholders including researchers
international institutions like the UN
policymakers industry leaders and civil
society organizations open research and
open source collaboration is
particularly important for AI because AI
is becoming a platform in the future
much of our interactions with a digital
world will be mediated by AI systems
most citizens will get most of their
information through AI assistants we need
those AI assistants to speak all the
languages in the world understand all the
cultures all the value systems all the
centers of interest and no single entity
can do this by itself so future AI systems
particularly open source ones will
require collaboration from partners around
the world bringing to the table
the data in their language and their
culture bringing computing resources and
collaborating to building an AI systems
which may eventually constitute a
repository of all human knowledge at fair
we're committed to continuing to push
the boundaries of what's possible with
open science and we invite all of you to
join us on this journey thank you
check okay is it working yeah okay good
welcome back everyone we hope you were
able to enjoy some great conversations
some connection and maybe some you and
food if it was good so this afternoon
we're turning our attention to one of the
most pressing questions in the tech
ecosystem today how can we ensure that
the rapid advancement of artificial
intelligence happens responsibly
transparently and in the service of the
public good our next session AI and
open source building ethical and
transparent systems dives into the
question through the open source
principles it is my pleasure to introduce
our moderator Hannah Aubrey a community
builder and an advocate for open
technologies she serves as the board
director of mass dome project providing
strategic direction and oversight to its
executive team she's also an open source
advocate for the AWS open source strategy
and marketing team we're so
thrilled to have her guiding this
conversation please welcome Hannah Aubrey
hello everyone thank you so much for that
warm welcome and welcome to our
panel on open source and AI building
ethical and transparent systems now we
all know that AI is a hot topic in fact
it's one of the most pressing topics of
our time how do we build trustworthy
equitable AI systems at scale especially
in a world that's increasingly powered by
algorithms we cannot see and do not
understand we've heard terms like open
safe and ethical used frequently but what
do they really mean in practice what role
can open source communities companies
and international organizations play in
shaping AI systems that reflect public
values and global priorities I'm thrilled
to be joined by a panel of
experts working across sectors to answer
those questions and hopefully a
dress some of these big feelings and
worries we see let's welcome our
panelists
thank you first Frederick Blauchetta
partner and global public sector data and
AI leader PwC Germany please welcome
Sabrina Farmer chief technology
officer of GitLab and please welcome Hakim
Hasid chief researcher
technology innovation Institute and
finally please welcome Giam Canela
director of the division for digital
inclusion and policies and digital
transformation UNESCO thank you so much
everyone for joining us now for our
opening I'd love to hear from each one of
you and maybe your and pardon me and
maybe your reflections will even connect
with our audiences here from where you
sit whether in policy research or
engineering what excites you or concerns
you the most about the direction AI is
heading let's start with you Frederick
thanks I'm very happy to be here it's a
third time that we're having this
conference I'm here for the third time I
just looked up before coming to the
panel when we were here the first time
because the UN is documenting that quite
well and I saw how we were in the
conference room in the front so thanks
again to the UN for making all this
possible first of all what excites me the
most well basically I think Jan mentioned
most of that and everyone in the room
knows all of that so very basically it's
just a transform a transformative power
that it will have this will be a paradigm
shifts like AI by itself but also
within itself so I think this is radically
and so fast transforming at the
moment and sometimes tough to stay to stay
on top of it and what is my biggest
concern from my point of view if we fail
to apply AI transparently and
ethically I think we risk deepening the
democratic fatigue that we are facing
at the moment in our societies and I think
this is really something that we
should think about especially with the
speed that AI is changing itself and the
society Sabrina thank you at GitLab we
build a DevSecOps platform and we
believe software engineers should have the
tools that they need to build software
faster and more secure what excites me
about the way people are applying AI
today is if you think about how a software
engineer spends their time they
actually spend a pretty low percentage of
their time building new software and
the majority of their time maintaining
software fixing bugs making sure it's
sustainable and scalable and all of that
what I see AI doing is AI is starting to
offload that maintenance work and that's
going to give software engineers the
ability to figure out what is the next
generation of innovation while a lot of
people talk about AI is that is that new
innovation I don't think so I think it's
going to unlock that innovation and by
freeing up people's time we're going to
see new industries and new problems being
solved what concerns me about AI and how
it's being both talked about and maybe
applied is that a lot of people are
trusting AI and not really validating the
data that it's giving back to you and
that is a concern for me for the security
aspects that go along with that but
also what are these models doing with the
data that we have and how is it
actually starting to prevent people to
have that data secure right and protected
and we have to as we unlock AI for our
developers broadly we have to
actually also enable them to understand
the risks that they're taking and hold
the vendors and providers accountable for
that responsibility that they have
thank you Akim what excites you and what
concerns you the most about the
direction AI is heading today all right
thank you so I will be mainly like
speaking from a model builder perspective
and I will I will just
mention to two excitements and to let's
say things that that worries me so the
first one I think in the excitement from
the excitement perspective is the
speed at which the innovation and the
advancement is happening so this keeps
us actually and all the community to be
extremely active to look into new
solutions because we are facing problems
almost every day so this is
extremely interesting and extremely new
for for everyone the second excitement is
that this is sort of an opportunity to
solve a lot of problems at the end of the
day things that we were not necessarily
having solutions for so I'm talking about
the health care for example so there is a
hope to find new medicines to search
for new solutions new new yeah new
solutions for for problems for diseases
so on and so forth from the concerns I I
would mention the the risk that is
attached to to this AI and the misuse of
this AI so these are things probably
that from a model builder perspective and
especially when we are in the open
source we cannot necessarily control all
the all the pathway from the building
the sharing of the of the AI until the end
of the usage the second thing
probably is the concentration of power so
having this AI between the hands of
probably few companies or few individuals
will probably result in much bigger
problems that that then solutions that we
can bring to the users and to the to
the economy thank you same question to you
thank you good would after no
pleasure to be here so in terms of the
good part of the story I'm very impressed
looking into the history of an
organization like UNESCO that is being
discussing these issues I mean the impacts
of technologies in human rights
since we were created in 1945 so as since
the last eight years I'm very
impressed how the whole of the society is
really engaged with this discussion of
AI because it's not the first time we are
having this conversation right so
when broadcasting was the issue we were
discussing the same stories accountability
transparency governance and so on but the
amount of actors that were involved
with the discussion was very limited and
now is virtually everyone and this is
also about the discussion here about being
open about an open source and this is
not minor we are not grasping the
importance of this moment of really
having the opportunity to collect the
inputs of the different sectors and
even in within the sectors before I'm
talking about the policy perspective when
we were discussing these issues in the UN
or UNESCO we were basically this
basically discussing with diplomats but
now we are getting the inputs of judges
of ministries of all types of different
areas of governments of regulators and
similar with civil society academic and
the industry so this is not minor at all
is a huge development the possibility of
having all these groups interested now
on the problems what really concerns me is
to treat these as a hype as a sign
shiny star there and then we all start
running towards these shiny stars without
taking into account the lessons learned of
the past so basically here in this
in this conference about open source but
the problem of AI or any of these
technologies that are basically
interacting with information if you read
the very first paragraph of the UNESCO
Constitution it's the mandate to protect
the free flow of information and then you
go to the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights again lots of those things
and we are kind of implying that we need
new values no we don't need new values
what is really concerning me that
is not we are not extending and holding
the line to say that the real issue here
is how we protect the values that we took
so much to build and this is the
real challenge and if we don't acknowledge
that we are going to lose the
battle thanks AI represents likely one of
the most massive opportunities for
humanity and has massive implications for
every system in which humanity operates
and we cannot lose our humanity I have
another question for every member of the
panel how is your organization approaching
this moment of rapid
change and reflection Frederick please
well first of all PwC is of course
changing in its own at this very moment we
have to transform the way we are
working the way we are delivering services
and this is a lot around how
would be in efficient and good use of AI
in many ways also ethically and
transparently but of course mainly within
my responsibility we help
governments design and implement
evidence-based scalable AI solutions in
most of the ways we try to do that
wherever possible in a regional ecosystem
approach but we position ourselves to come
from rather the business side and
not be dependent on take alliances or the
monopoly said just have been mentioned
but to be rather open about what you can
do in the specific areas and I think the
trend that we are seeing and maybe we come
to that also later on is I mean the
era of chatbots is very much to an end
coming at the moment right so I think we
have to talk a lot more about vertical AI
about really solving some of the
pressing issues at this very moment and
the paradigm shifts is also indicating
that and helping us in that way thank you
Sabrina
and there's two ways we we do this at
GitLab we're vendor agnostic and so we
work with all of the AI providers and we
evaluate all of the different models
both open source and and proprietary and
before we put anything into our product
we we ensure with the vendor or the
policies around the open source models
that they respect that we have customer
data they cannot develop against that
data they cannot train against that data
that enables us to indemnify our
customers and our and our users so that
they can openly use this so that's what
we do on you know partnering with the
different providers out there I would
say the big focus for us today while in
the last couple of years people have
focused on AI to write code code
generation code completion and things
like that we're investing heavily in what
does agent AI do and what are some of
the protections we need around that and
also how do we bring these agents and
help people understand what they're good
for and what they're not good for and
how to use it responsibly like any tool
this is not a solution for all problems
Akim how is your organization approaching
this moment I think the I
would say two keywords here right the the
open source and the collaboration so
the open source is because we have been
among the first companies to open source
our models the Farcon large language
models from the beginning so we always
believe that AI is probably a much more
complex problem than or opportunity to
be explored by one actor so we have always
pushed for this and the
collaboration again is to bring many
actors on the on around the table to
collaborate together so the we have part
of the work that we do is done
internally but we work a lot with
universities with other companies startups
to extend the capabilities and work
collaboratively into into solving
these new AI problems thank you yeah same
question to you so in our case in
being of course a United Nations system
organization in in dealing with these
issues from the perspective of the five
areas of mandate of UNESCO and so
education natural science social and
human-sized culture and freedom of
expression our approach to this is how we
see this revolution and apply it
concretely in supporting our key
stakeholders particularly our member
states in implementing that with an
ethical and human rights driven logic
and then the challenge is how we do that
concretely so one important thing to
to bear in mind is that these revolution
was very much possible because the
entire United Nations system since the
outset in 1945 including UNESCO had a
major task to create an international rule
of law system so the exchange of
ideas of scientists cross boundaries that
actually allowed the scientific
revolution was possible because this was
protected by these international rule
of law system and right now apparently
there is some kind of conversation well
you guys are creating a problem for us in
saying that these things should have
human rights no no we allowed this this
was possible because there was an
international rule of law systems
protecting this circulation so what we
are trying to do now it's to do the same
in this moment so in but translated in
very concrete thing so governments all
over the world they need to review their
procurement policies to include this
concretely in the new procurement
services and new procurement policies
education institutions all over the
world they need to review their policies
to make sure that for example open an
educational resources that is something
UNESCO has been advocating
forever it's translated also in the new AI
revolution I will stop with the
examples multilingualism that is another
thing that is related to UNESCO is now
also governments all over the world did to
make sure that when they are taking
decisions about AI these things are
implemented there and that could could
keep going on our different issues in
terms of open science or the role of AI
in the judiciary or in the or regarding
the documental heritage so you know in
a nutshell the thing is well okay there is
this current revolution going on but
how we translate that in a way that the
human rights agenda that we have
collectively built in these last eight
decades is it's our first priority thanks
thank you we've spoken a little bit about
the opportunity and your unique
strategies to AI and I'd like to turn our
conversation to AI in practice
Frederick and Sabrina both of your
organizations work at the intersection
of technology and public impact Frederick
having worked with the German
chancery and now in the private sector how
are governments thinking about open
source AI that's a tough one I try to to
break it down maybe two to four
points very basically so and also to widen
up a little bit for the
conversation said I just had on a coffee
break today so I think first of all the
execution grab we're having is now a trust
crisis governments face a growing
gap between their digital outputs and
their digital capabilities and what
citizens and all of us in this room may be
experienced in their private lives
and this is increasingly becoming a trust
issue from my point of view many
public administrations are still
delivering quite slow feeling sometimes
outdated not really seamless experiences
and I think this is by now not just a
technology gap it is rather a governance
gap that we are facing and citizens are
losing faith trust erodes so in many
degree democracy I see it I think we we
are coming to frustration polarization
disengagement I mean you see that not
far from this building also happening very
much so but I think we should all be
encouraged because states can deliver when
they must and we have seen that in
many situations in the past already we've
seen that during COVID we have seen it
for example just around the door the I-95
collapse and and we know it can
deliver a lot but we have all worked
together especially in those multi-stake
older approaches like the format we have
down here at this very moment second I
think bold moves are required instead of
just another iteration and very small
ones I think AI really needs to help us to
to really take some leaps at this
very moment we have to be a little bit
faster in how governments are executing
technology and putting those things
together of course AI is not solving
everything I got so many files during my
term when I was asked by someone in many
colors can't this be delivered with AI
truth is most of the things can be
delivered with basic automation and RBA I
think everyone in this room would
agree on that but still we have this
opportunity at this very moment and the
problem is the time to market for
streamlining processes and digitizing
those is just too long in the time of the
crisis we are facing at this very
moment into our governments and now I'm
coming to open source sovereignty without
isolation should from my point of view
that would be my third hypothesis should
equal open source very basically said we
must stop to confuse digits of
remedy with isolationism and this is
really what open source and AI can
support I think they can support national
control while enabling global
cooperation I think we have really to move
forwards on this one I have just
spoken with many governments beat Canada
France India and they are all seeking
alternatives to the tech wall that is
going on out in the world between on the
one hand side the US and on the other hand
side China it is very moment and we
we have really to to go for that and
isolationism would be a mistake at this
very point we have to build shared open
source AI systems for core public
functions and we have to make them in the
best case DPI to really make them
available for many countries to be them
adaptable to follow the local laws and
the regulatory frameworks we have seen so
many examples of this and I would be
especially with young like WHO also
mentioned one of the best chances for
that and last point and then I was top on
my points I would rather argue and this
is always a discussion because it strikes
a balance that you have to to get at
some point I would say I would put
capacity building at this very moment
over governance perfection I'm not saying
we don't need governance but I'm
rather saying that maybe a form of
co-opetition that's what we did at the
data labs in Germany could be a way
forward in this rather to wait for the
perfect frameworks we saw I mean I'm from
Europe so we are very good in
regulation in many ways and rather than to
strike for the perfect framework you
know this is a two-fold you have to
regulate and build a governance but we
have also to know where this technology is
going and to really
practically implement it because it's
radically transforming everything and
it's so quickly changing the paradigm
shifts we are seeing at this very moment
are rapidly and this is exactly what we
have to react upon from my point of view
so capacity is key on this one and
perfection shouldn't delay our action
from my point of view and of course we see
that the infrastructures are not yet
there in every country so we have ready to
put this forward so summarizing open
source AI is not just a technical choice I
think it's a strategic foundation for
trusted digital government in an even more
fragmented world and I think this is
what we have to put together here and at
every stage that we are doing can do it
thank you thank you Frederick I think I
think this is a great segue into a guest
video appearance by Stephanie Hong chief
information officer of the Asian
Development Bank addressing AI democratization
please let's turn to the screen
Asian Development Bank from Good Day from
the Asian Development Bank thank you
for the United Nations open source week
organizing team for the honor to share
the stage with many esteemed speakers and
distinguished guests today to speak
about a topic that is a vital to the
development of our collective digital
future the future is already here it's
just not evenly distributed quote from
William Gibson a pioneer of cyberpunk
science fiction the visionary author WHO
gifted us the term cyberspace in his
groundbreaking sword story burning
chrome Gibson's words resonate like an
echo across the corridors of time
reminding us that innovation often a wife
quietly scattering is sits
unevenly before flourishing into a shared
reality as the chief information
officer of the Asian Development Bank I'm
profoundly excited about the discussion
that unfolding at this UN open source week
we are gathered not just to talk
about coding but to discuss the very
fabric of our future where open source
solution and partnership will play an
indispensable role in shipping economic
prosperity and sustainable development
across the world for that case AI was the
domain of well-funded research
institutions and tech giants its power
was concentrated the tools were
proprietary the data silo and AI
development often showed in proprietary
secrecy the RISE of open source is nothing
shut off revolutionary it represents a
paradigm shift for proprietary silo to
collaborative ecosystem a movement from
closed door innovation to a vibrant
global common of ideas suddenly
sophisticated algorithms powerful
frameworks led 10 centfro and pytorch and
virus data set became accessible to a
global community of developer researcher
and the printer and even hobbyist this
wasn't just about lowering the cost of
entry it was about igniting a global
spot of curiosity and ingenuity and the
democratization of AI we witnessed the
exponential growth of generative AI
capable of creating learning and
interacting in ways we are only beginning
to comprehend the rapid
acceleration is intricately linked to the
collaborative spirit forced by open
source communities when quote is share
when models are transparent when research
is published openly progress is not linear
but exponential we see this in
advancement in natural language processing
computer vision medical
diagnostics and climate change modeling
feels where open collaboration is
tackling some of the humanities most
pressing challenges I see the profound
implication of open source for equitable
development and inclusive growth for
too long the digital divide has been
exacerbated by the high cost of
connectivity and infrastructure
proprietary software and the lack of
localized relevant solution with the
accelerated adoption of AI in the
developed world we need to my mind for the
widening gap in the developing
country to truly harness the
transformative power we need robust and
inclusive ecosystem this ecosystem a
complex network of university research
institutions startups large corporation
government civil society organizations
and individual contributors all working in
synergy they provide the infrastructure
the talent the funding the policy and the
ethical frameworks necessary for AI to
forward responsibly ADB our strategic
focus as a development institution is to
accelerate the digital transformation
across Asia and the Pacific we envision
a future where digital technology helps
advance development goal creating
inclusive innovative and secure ecosystem
that are adaptable to the
diverse needs and prepare our developing
member countries in the digital and AI
era there are several ways that ADB is
working towards this goal the first is
true digital public good and share
infrastructure we aim to provide digital
common goods and regional asset through
interventions such as regulatory
sandboxing academia's industry
collaboration and incubation program
these are hallmark area where open source
tools thrive especially in
creating reusable adaptable and scalable
solution across countries and
sectors recognizing this ADB became a
member of the digital public goods
alliance a UN backed initiative we see
exciting opportunity to advance the
digital agenda the second is by enabling
regional knowledge sharing and capacity
building knowledge sharing digital
sandboxes and virtual learning platform are
often built on or benefit from open source
platform which allow for
collaborative development and localization
third is through our support for
interoperability and open standards for
development areas such as health which
directly enable open source solutions
fourth is by nurturing the public and
private sector development of culturally
appropriate and local language content
best supported through open source
platform that allow for community driven
localization and customization fifth is by
sharing our responsible AI
guidelines around ethical use of AI the
responsible dissemination of
potentially dual use technology and the
need for robust governance framework
and last but not the least our investment
in startup through ADB's
venture and is sustainable funding models
and strong support for accelerator and
incubator create a fertile ground for open
source innovation especially in
sectors like agrid tech clean tech and
health tech the UN open source we
makes it clear that there are many
exciting opportunity for us to learn from
each other to innovate and to forge
stronger partnership the UN open source
principle provide an excellent framework
and its dedication to recreating a
global network for good is precisely the
kind of collaborative action we need to
see replicated across every nation's and
region as we look towards 2030 and
beyond ADB is committed to actively
champion open source as a cornerstone
for our digital development agenda we
believe that by fostering strong
ecosystem partnerships by embracing open
collaboration and by investing
digital public goods we can unlock
unprecedented economic opportunities
accelerate poverty reduction and build a
truly inclusive
prosperity resilient and sustainable
communities for all our collective
digital future is not predetermined it is
a future we are all building line of
code by line of code idea by idea by
democratizing AI and embracing open
source we choose a future that is more
innovative more equitable more transparent
ultimately more hopeful thank you
thank you to Stephanie and the ADB Sabrina
GitLab is a major contributor to
open source infrastructure how can we
better support contributors and
maintainers working on responsible AI I
think that you know I've said before
like transparency is super important and
helping people understand how to
protect users and their information so
encouraging privacy but I think the
biggest gap that we have today that we
need people contributing to is education
of what AI can do for them so much of the
press and actually very large
companies that would like to restrict
access to it use fear they talk about
losing jobs and people don't engage with
the technology out of fear yet in
reality one of the things I think that the
open source community all of you
have done is show that by investing in it
we actually all prosper and we
actually grow the number of jobs that we
have I think this community and all of
us play a part in showcasing that that we
are going to create jobs while we may
eliminate some roles today it's actually
going to evolve those roles will evolve
AI will do yesterday's jobs for us so that
we can do next year's jobs and the
jobs in 10 years it is up to all of us to
showcase that potential and myth bust
what the press and the large companies are
trying to tell us AI means for us
thank you Hakim as researcher what are the
greatest technical and ethical
challenges facing the open source AI
community today and where do you see the
most urgent need for collaboration thank
you that's a very difficult question I
guess we can well I can spend like a next
hour talking about this but I guess we
have just two minutes right that's that's
fine I think well I will limit this to
probably three or four main aspects I
think the first one the challenge that we
have is that of the data I was last week
at the G20 preparations and I think we
had full day discussing about the data I
think this data is extremely important
and we all know that the data is probably
the oil that fuels this this AI but again
the data that we are talking about here is
a high quality data right it's not
all the data that is available out there
is good for for for the AI so I think
the first challenge is to increase the
amount of the high quality data that we
are having that is available for
researchers to build these models and
then the data that that we see the public
data that is available is a
fraction of the data that can be accessed
by AI so the data that is
available in enterprises for example is
not accessible for us to build these
models so finding ways and this goes on
the technical side through the
federated learning for example for those
WHO are familiar with that developing
techniques that allow at the same time
preserving the privacy of the of the
data but also supporting in building
models is an extremely important aspect
the second thing for the for this
collaboration and challenges is probably
in the education and the upskidding of the
of the talents so I think we all see
the the lacking in terms of talents we are
having issues every day and every
every month to hire people WHO can
actually work on this AI on this on
these models so I think it's extremely
important to build probably
collaborative programs and material to
educate people not only on how to use
this this AI but to to get into more
sophisticated aspects of AI building
this AI and controlling this AI the third
aspect I would focus on will be
the regulation I think we need a huge
collaboration around this regulation we
see a lot of appetite to either to over
regulate and I think we can go to the
example of Europe sorry about that but we
also see other countries that do not
want to regulate at all I think from my
perspective the the regulation has to be
there but the risk that we see from the
research perspective at least is that
this can slow down the innovation and
probably blocked completely the the
innovation so there is a need for
regulation but there is a need to do it
in a collective collective way the last
point I would I would mention is the
standardization we may always think that
it's too early to standardize to
introduce standards at the moment but we
see that the the field is really going
into all directions that's very
interesting it gives a lot of ideas but
there is a moment where we need to
collectively sit and look into what
could help us also to speed up the
innovation because having for example
developers WHO need to redevelop things
from scratch because there is no way to
add those things directly or to build on
top of things that are available in the
in the community is just waste of time
energy resources so on and so forth
thank you Guillermo last question for you
UNESCO has done extensive work on AI
ethics how can international governance
and rights-based frameworks help guide
open source development and ensure these
tools work for all thank you so I invite
you to picture for a moment a house of
cards and now picture a house of cards 100
times bigger than the one you have
picture initially so this is the challenge
of international governance
each one of us in all the 194 member
states all different sector we are
trying to take cards of these house of
cards right for different reasons and the
job of the international governance system
is to guarantee that we are not
going to dismantle the entire house of
cards by taking these cards and for us
not dismantling it means that we are going
to do this job while protecting
freedom of expression for everyone and not
only for the AI companies or the
people building it we are going to protect
privacy for everyone and not for
those only those that are using it and I'm
afraid to say that these things they
come with a cost nobody said that
protecting human rights is free of
charge and sometimes it takes time and
maybe the real innovation is how we do
these things without leaving no one behind
so I think it's a false dilemma
this idea that either we have super
regulation or we are super governance
or we have nothing every decision is a
governance decision including of not
doing nothing so when an electoral
regulator is taking decisions about AI
and elections even if it's not a
legislation is a governance decision
every time a judge is judging something
related to AI it's a governance
decision or a or a minister of education
or a minister of health or
whatever so what is our job is to offer
guidance to these processes either they
are a super legislative process or they
are a tiny little regulatory decision
but the bottom line is that they need to
be done in full alignment with
international human rights law otherwise
everyone is going to lose at the end of
the day although we can't notice these
necessarily from this point of view
right so but it's easy to say not easy to
do
final thing I want to say in terms of
these guidance
these collectively think that we are all
talking about here about the
openness have shown in the past and
there's not a past of 100 years ago for
example during covid the scientists that
decided to follow the idea of open
science that UNESCO has been advocating
for decades and shared their research
and shared their publications etc. allowed
the vaccines to be produced in
record time so it's possible to do when
there is a collective engagement when
there is a political will and I want to
say political is not only from
governments for everyone to follow these
debates so this is our job is to offer
this perspective from a collectively
sinking from the global north the global
south the global majority whatever you
want to call it or from a mistake all the
perspective that we have faced this before
transparency accountability risk
assessments all these words that we are
using here today public goods they are
not new words we have been tried this
before so just to finish by say that this
is a bit the guidance coming from the UN
system and UNESCO as well thank you
thank you so much to all of our panelists
they will hopefully all be at the
reception for any further questions and
that brings our panel to a close thank
you thank you to that panel for that
fascinating discussion so we've just
explored how open source principles can
shape ethical development of AI but as
many of our speakers have highlighted AI
is only as good as the data that
fuels it which brings us to our next panel
breaking silos open source and
open data drive interoperability before we
get into this exciting panel I want
to kindly ask the me tree Mary Mary Yasan
deputy executive secretary at UN ECE to
give us a keynote address of this panel
thank you very much good good afternoon
distinguished delegates colleagues and
innovators it says here but I hope I can
just say good afternoon distinguished
innovators and it's very special that we
gather here today to not discuss
technology but to discuss collaboration
transparency and shared progress and I'd
like to thank the audit and the OICT
within the UN for leading this effort I'll
divided I've divided my speech into three
parts first some general points then I
'll illustrate a little bit with what we
do at the UN Economic Commission for
Europe and then I flew concluding few
concluding remarks on the challenges let
me start by what is probably obvious to
all of you after almost a day of
deliberations but that we have to have
much more interoperability inclusivity
and transparency in the systems we design
today as digital infrastructure and
artificial intelligence are truly
reshaping the way we live but that's
easier said than done silos which is the
topic of my keynote speech rather how
to overcome them exist between
institutions between sectors between
technologies even between citizens and the
systems meant to serve them the silos
are pervasive they fragment data they
hinder innovation they limit our ability
to respond to global challenges the
obvious geopolitical silos are in the
press but the more granular silos that pre
meet the markets that actually
disrupt the technological innovation are
less visible and that's why in our
view it's very important to address them
head-on including within the United
Nations well we are known for our ability
to create silos by duplicating structures
and the Secretary General's initiative of
UN80 a renewal of the organization is
meant to precisely address that but very
importantly we need to understand that
silos appear out of interests out of
incentive structures that are misaligned
and of course out of egos including in the
tech sector because egos drive a lot
of innovation it's good to have strong
egos but we need to be very aware of
what that means that is why the concept of
open is so important it's important
at the philosophical level and it's
important in a very practical way open
source it the way we understand it from
the UN is not just a technical model it's
not just a way a tech community organizes
itself it's a governance model the word
governance was repeated several times in
the previous panel and I'd like to
dwell on it it invites scrutiny
accountability trust enables communities
to co-create solutions that are acceptable
to many that are adaptable
and secure and these are all all these
keywords all these buzzwords trust and
adaptability and security are buzzwords
and and are a rare commodity these days
so when we design open source systems we
are designing a governance model that
is actually fitting these days complexity
same similarly open date
in power citizens and researchers and
policymakers and the concept of open
science was just mentioned I think this is
a very very important governance
shift that needs to occur so this
conference is not as much about the way
that the tech community can come together
to help us solve some issues it is very
much about the way that things will be
governed including at the UN and the
role of this conference for the UN is more
than oh you know digital guys of
the UN will do more with open source
community it should actually serve as
inspiration for how UN should work more
broadly so this is a little bit of a
theoretical you know outline now let me
tell you why I am standing here as the
deputy head of the UN Economic Commission
for Europe an entity but which
you probably have not heard it's one of
the five regional commissions and where
a bit different from the other commissions
because we carry a lot of
regulatory role well Europe regulation of
course these two words they come
together as was already mentioned we
regulate though not just for the sake
of regulation but and this is my first
message to you because UN's fundamental
role is to create public goods and we are
very proud to champion digital
innovation now reforming the way we
regulate to deliver tangible public
value and I'd like to illustrate it with
an example of a public tool that is
very much associated with the UN a
convention so illegally binding instrument
adopted by member states in fact a long
time ago after World War II it's called
the tier convention and it's a global
treaty that regulates how goods in transit
move across borders with minimal
interference it's basically a customs
facilitation convention and some of you
might have seen on the roads around the
world big trucks with a little blue sign
and TIR letters written in it that is
the tier convention behind it is a very
complex system of guarantees which
allows one customs office to trust another
customs office sometimes thousands
miles away and that of course has over the
past 80 years generated a reduction
of transport cost by 92 percent sorry by
50 percent and transport time by 92 percent
currently the convention is used by 33,
000 transport and logistics companies in
66 countries worldwide so it's a public
good but it's a paper public good that
has been operating as a paper car now for
which people are charged for the past
80 years obviously completely out of touch
with today's digital reality so a
few years ago member states decided to
digitalize it and create an e-tier
system transforming the convention in a
fully into fully paperless secure and
interoperable customs transit procedure
and what we do today is much more than
just an upgrade we at unisee as a
custodian of this convention have
developed an open source solution this is
where the open source link comes in
called e-tier national application that
will allow real-time exchange of transit
data support risk analysis and manage the
full cycle of the tier operation so
basically it's a very simple to install
and maintain module that any country
around the world can use and it plugs in
into the global system and is based on
open-source now that is actually sounding
very logical to you especially those
of you WHO are from the private sector but
believe me doing what I just said in
real life an open-source application that
the UN hands over to national
customs offices in 60 plus countries is an
extremely complicated task to
implement it will have to break quite a
few silos but in doing this we will not
just save money and time and value change
disruption is now in the press
you're all waiting for your goods much for
much longer and there's a reason for
that so we are trying to compensate the
value change disruptions due to war for
example climate effects by reducing
transit time so it's a public good we
create and in the meantime we also build
capacity because this is designed for
countries to use nationally to have
nationally built capacity to operate
the system so UN as a builder of capacity
is the second reason we need to
engage much more in open-source solutions
another example from UNices
work I'd like to give you is UN CFACT
which develops global standards like UN
low-code and UN ediFACT you may not have
heard about them but any Amazon package
that crosses a notion has used one of the
CFACT standards because well as I
discovered myself recently this system
supports 95% of structured
messaging and maritime trade and this is
something that we take for granted but
there have been thousands of experts and
they still are out there in CFACT it's a
structure under UNICE that have been
developing this digital infrastructure
messaging infrastructure over the years
and I'm very pleased to say that the
chair of UN CFACT the intergovernmental
body under UNICEE stands in Norris
she's here and she'll speak later to you
today about about the details of that
but so UN CFACT as well is embracing
open-source technologies to enhance
transparency and foster innovation and
will be the direct contribution to the
digital global digital compact under it
we're working on the UN transparency
protocol that will support sustainability
and regulatory compliance so this is a
third function of the UN so I said UN is a
public good provider UN is a
builder of capacity and thirdly UN is a
driver of sustainability we need to make
sure that digital solutions actually
improve sustainability and actually help
us manage the constraints of the planet we
only have one and of course we know
there are facts there are figures that
confirm that digitalizing trade also
reducing carbon footprint pollution and
other negative effects but simultaneously
it cuts costs and cuts clearance times by
30-50% according to OECD and WTO so
these two examples one is a customs
convention and other is a digital
messaging tools used by global trade in
both we're applying digital solutions in
both we rely on open-source and in both we
need your help because and that's my
final bit challenges do remain technical
barriers there are many legacy systems
that don't talk to each other well you're
in the UN so you will be surprised to see
how many legacy systems are here that
nobody even knows about but they're still
running in the background no common
standards limited capacity to scale up
open applications we face a lot of policy
hurdles as well especially data
privacy is a concern and of course you
know the political will is not always
there and we face market dynamics I will
not lie to you the UN has a problem of
how it engages with vendors it does not
actually know how to manage the very
complex and competitive market out there
and vendors may may take advantage so
vendor lock-in proprietary dependencies
and so on and so forth our realities for
us and I should add to that one of the
very important challenges is the
over cautious nature of the UN as a global
public institution driven by
member states so when you have 193
shareholders imagine you know a you know
a board of directors with 193 people I
don't think any company on earth has
that you become cautious you check your
every step you watch your back right so
both legal constraints and political
dynamics are a real issue for us and we
need we need to acknowledge this and
that's why we're having this conference
we're opening up to you and we are trying
to use this as a way to open up
inside the UN system and break those silos
and going forward and I finish here
we need and I would like to emphasize what
was was already mentioned invest in
open digital public infrastructure and
learn how it's done at national level for
the international digital public
infrastructure we need in that spirit
promote international to promote
international standards for interoperability
we need to create enabling policy
environments to protect rights
proactively protect rights rather than
find that you are in breach of some kind
of copyright later on or if you haven't
done your licensing well so we need to
be proactive about managing this and this
is where the experience of the
open source community is so valuable to us
and of course breaking silos is not
just about connecting systems it's about
connecting people it's about
ensuring that we can talk across these
barriers that I mentioned and in that
sense this conference is an amazing
opportunity to break silos in its own
right to listen to each other to learn and
I hope that together with us you will
help us deliver public goods you will help
us build capacity including in the
global majority and drive sustainability
because we have to thank you so much
thank you Dimitri for that keynote address
we're running short on times and I had
written up very nice things to say about
Mehdi but I'm just going to call Mehdi
onto stage to lead this panel thank you
thank you so much the most important
information is that we are very short of
time and we want to satisfy our
colleagues sitting all around helping you
with the translation so we'll not
take it forever I'll just before
introducing my dear panelists just would
like to bring something to your attention
2012 we start seeing the
emergence of the notion of dataism which
is the notion of bringing every value
related to the data that has been
generating by the object or the person
or the context dataism got emerged with
all these big data notions IUT
smart data and it becomes a very big and
broad principle in building the
technology systems today as we stand at
the UN we are talking about data I'd
like to face is a little bit more the the
humanism principles that the UN is
carrying is protecting the human rights
and humanity and then this is the way
we are building this panel or making this
panel will be talking about the
dataism vision against the humanism vision
and I'd like to bring to I mean to
invite all the dear panelists to join the
the panel table Mrs. Rebecca
Mackinon vice president of global advocacy
from Wikimedia Foundation
Mr. Masuyuki Yamada head of data units
digital agency from the government of
Japan Mrs. Nabi has said the executive
director of Mozilla Foundation and my
friend Momar Kuda senior officers from the
African Development Bank and then we
will be talking a little bit about the
breaking the silos and how how this
open data our notion of data could
contribute to advancing development and
to drive interoperability
friends and colleague thank you all for
joining this final panel today and I'm
very glad to have you all with us as I
said we are short in time so it will be
conceived and answered and direct into the
topic so I'd like firstly to to hear
from you regarding open data
interoperability the silos where are we
today in each of your organization when it
comes to this subject how you see it
and what are the major challenges that you
are facing today in bringing that
inside of your organization and I propose
that we we start with Mrs.
Trupeka and then yes if you don't mind
colleagues please
hi good afternoon and just maybe I just
want to thank you and the United
Nations for holding this week-long event
it's very exciting I think I'm not
quite sure what the Security Council is
talking about today but I'm pretty sure
that this is the more optimistic room and
the room where where solutions are
moving forward in a much more hopeful way
so in any rate I represent the
Wikimedia Foundation we're the nonprofit
that supports Wikipedia and
other volunteer run free knowledge
projects our mission is to support and
enable anyone in the world to participate
in collecting and disseminating open
knowledge we support these activities in
more than 300 languages and for many
people Wikipedia is the first stopped
learning about any number of topics of
interest to the tune of 16 billion page
views per month Wikipedia is open
source it has grown out of the open source
community it was started in 2001
group from the free software community
it's powered by media wiki which is
open-source software that we maintain we
run on other open source software like
PHP Maria DB our developers work in the
open on IRC etc it's well known that
Wikipedia is written and edited by
volunteers producing data that is open
to the world not only on Wikipedia but in
other projects like wiki data wiki
source which scenario etc but what many
people don't realize is that we also
have a global community of technical
volunteers WHO participate in open
source tool development and maintenance
for the project our community is radically
open and transparent about the work that
they do not just the technical work but
of course every edit ever made on
Wikipedia or any of the other projects
is is publicly visible all the arguments
about them is publicly visible every
line of code that runs our projects can
can be scrutinized and our staff and
volunteers also contribute code and
conduct content to other open source and
open knowledge projects but more
fundamentally Wikipedia is not possible
without being part of an interdependent
open source ecosystem and open data
ecosystem the projects could not not only
not exist without other open source
software projects but also the information
on Wikipedia would be no
good without a whole universe of open data
projects open science independent
journalism etc WHO also depend on open
source software and and so it's a very
interdependent ecosystem and I think this
is this is something I think that
just to tie it up in terms of the
significance here and the speech we
were we were just listening to we're
coming together with governments here
in the United Nations WHO represent their
geographical constituencies within
their national borders of course we have
people here WHO are citizens of those
countries WHO are coming together as
constituencies cross-border
constituencies that maintain open data
sets software projects and so on so in a
way we're sort of the the network
constituencies WHO are maintaining and
building the digital world coming together
with the governments of the
physical nation states and we're building
a new world and that is exciting
thank you so much Rebekah that's very
insightful let me see how this and this
question would be answered by Nadia please
from the data foundation of course
well I'm happy to build on the optimism so
Mozilla Foundation is defiantly
optimistic that our collective digital
future can actually be good if if
communities are enabled and empowered to
build and define what good means for
themselves right and so this means that
this is true in the open web context and
true in the open source AI context we need
to make sure that people around the
world are not just consumers of what
happens to be designed in Silicon Valley
but actually empowered to be creating on
their own and open source serves that
but as we heard in the keynote open source
is only one instantiation of a
broader philosophy around open source so
we try to bring that openness philosophy
to the advocacy work that we do engaging
governments throughout the world to
resourcing the creation of digital public
goods that allow open source work to
thrive to our grant making which includes
an incubator for figuring out product
community fit because so much of the open
source work that exists in the
world is community led community driven so
it's not just about product market
fit in this landscape but actually product
community fit and our mobilization
broader advocacy so we're trying to live
that philosophy in a variety of
different areas including also product
development and I think it's we've heard
the word transparency quite a lot it's
important to I think tease out a
difference of openness and transparency
are in fact not the same thing
transparency is a mode of showing what is
happening but openness really in its
philosophy is about active engagement and
participation so it means that you
need to think about the overall conditions
for participation whether
that's economic barriers access barriers
other barriers that prohibit people
from participating in open source in
participating and having the sort of
agency around the future of technology
which when it comes to AI has a lot of
recess or a resource and technical
oriented hurdles so there's a lot of
work to be done there I will just close
because you asked for the the optimism
also the challenges in implementing this
when it comes to open source AI it's
not a natural fit to think that the values
of the open web can be easily
transported to a future of open source AI
where increasingly people are
trusting AI media mediated systems for
answers just a simple example of you
know if you decide to query something on a
search you receive a list of links
and you've to exercise some critical
thinking to decide what is a source that
you think is worthwhile what is a source
that you should look at how you make
those decisions that entire friction which
is what it's metabolized as in the
open web context is removed in the AI
chatbot mediated version of this world
what is lost when we lose that friction
and so I think you know those are the
types of questions the difficulties that
we face of thinking about what does
open source mean in one context what is it
going to mean in the context we are
facing and how are questions around open
data and other things that we thought
we had a perspective and answer on in one
context actually challenged and
pressured in a new context going forward
thank you so much that remind me that
we've been for a long time working on open
source and open data in a separate
manner open AI is bringing us together
because we have to think about the data
and the the code now for once but I think
there's even more it's about the
outcome open outcome of the AI how to
bring that the entire value chain because
literally we've been working in silos and
that's the subjects of today and now
even within our community of openness how
to bring all these small pieces of
community together to because the AI is
bringing all of us together it's not a
choice it's a priority I think in our
working but I'd like to to get that
vision from a member states and then today
we have the honor to have the
Japan government representative in data
digital agency with Mr. Masayuku WHO is
leading on the data in the digital agency
in Japan and I'd like to hear how
officially you are leading on this
openness movement in terms of data with
all the challenges coming from the digital
transformation to the new
emerging technologies and AI thank you
many so the under the certain needs
delay it's already out of control but let
me try my best I'm Masayuku Yamada
coming from Japan representing the digital
agency government of Japan
digital agency was established in 2021 and
which is a very young organization
driven by a single powered by powerful
mission the power in the future of
Japan through digitalization and our
vision is very clear digital society
where no one is left behind fostering our
more convenient diverse and the
director for life for every student so
this is a vision we are trying to
deliver and the digital agency was
established with a significant power
under the digital agency establishment act
this registration provide us with
essential tools such as the authority to
recommend policies and budget requests
across ministries centrally execute a
major digital budget these are the
enabling us to derive the fundamental
change and addressing a wrong standing
challenge in Japan's digital landscape
including the breaking the down the
down the silos and regarding open data
open our commitment to open data in
Japan's deeply rooted in our act of the
promotion of the public data
utilization enacted in 2016 following this
the open data basic guidelines were
established articulating the principles of
the open by default machine
availability and free availability to
enable broad reuse we then develop the
public data usage terms and the condition
which is aligned to the CC by
4.0 ensuring clarity and the consistency
in data utilization and these these
regard on policy framework positions open
data not just as a policy but as
a bedrock for achieving our broader
mission of digital transformation okay so
within this extensive framework our data
units actually I'm a head of a data
unit and that our data unit specific
function goal part of three arrange for
those objectives to identify the rating to
value in data convey it clearly and
contribute to its realization we view open
data as a bedrock for transparency
and innovation empowering the students
businesses and the researchers the
interoperability driven by open data
standards is a foundation for breaking
down internet information silos across
government ministries and local
authorities enabling the a seamless data
flow essential for modern public
services in parallel open source
technologies are vital for building
robust flexible and efficient digital
infrastructure that serves the global
public interest both a critical drivers
for Japan's digital
transformational and the foster the
broader cooperation internally and the
globally thank you thank you so much
thanks for very insightful understand now
we have at least understanding of where
are you heading in Japan with all these
open data I'll look at my friend mama the
african data highway information
highway data innovation lab a lot of
things but I know that I'm much more
focusing on statistical official
statistics in the african development
bank and I know how we are struggling in
africa with sometimes where they with
that and then it do you think that there's
any gap that needs to be reduced
from official statistics and it was it is
done today not only in africa but the
global scale and the open data and the
openness in terms of the the official
statistics that are supposed to be
pioneering in terms of openness thank
you so much Maggie so as you said I think
here my first point here is that the
bank is playing kind of enable role in
africa supporting open data principal
implementation and as well also supporting
as well open source solution
as well and this is done under flagship I
mean initiative that I'm leading at
the bank we call it africa if machine
highway initiative and also that
innovation lab and to support African
countries implementing open data
principles we have provided to all African
countries open data portals that
support African countries to make their
data open and starting now with what may
decide to mean on the official statistics
that would be I think for the starting
point at the country level the country is
investing lot of I mean resource for
collecting data and also for I mean
producing this data so making this
data openly available is a very good
starting point so that's why the bank
you start focusing on that aspect to make
sure that we support all African
countries building a network of open data
platform where countries can now
make their data publicly available and
this platform as well as a kind of
enable also for the interoperability as
well where countries can easily I mean
be shared with with with with partners and
also with as a nation as well in
Africa but in addition to the official
statistics as well we are also promoting
under the innovation lab as well I mean
non-traditional data and that again we
also focus on open source and open source
I mean solution as well to make
so that given the limited resource from
the countries we built on open source
solution to innovate and as well to
complement of statistics using data I
mean from big tech company or the data
from mobile phone company and so on so
that's mainly the two pillar on which we
are working currently to I mean to
place this enableer role in Africa and
making so that so open data principles
are well implemented and also I mean I
mean across Africa and one last point here
is I mean also still on our enabled role
as well we are currently building on
on the success of Africa information
highway initiative to also establish
what we call a Pan-African data sharing
community across Africa which was I
mean approved by the CODI the committee of
direct general statistics offices
last December and the bank is currently
working with partners like African union
here I am unique as well to establish this
Pan-African data sharing community
where open source and open data principles
will be the key pillar to
I mean on which we are going to build
capacity for African countries in order
to I mean achieve this objective for
making data available in general thank
you so much thank you so much I'll be I'm
looking at the they agreed up on
questions and I think that I'm going to
challenge a little bit because of the
time we've been looking into the data as
as as an asset data as oil data as new
all data as new gods haven't seen really
outcome coming from data many
member states or many many countries
haven't seen anything coming from the
data and then we've been with the
development of the artificial intelligence
where I've seen our data being used by all
these companies without
infirment consent without shared outcome
without any contribution or even
information to the member states or or
people WHO are delivering these data in
these common data which is Internet and
then within the global digital compact
and the digital roadmap from the security
general there is a notion of data
comes so we are moving from common data to
data comments and I'd like you to to
to ask you about this vision now data is
no longer the asset by itself data is
coming with an entire ecosystem where we
are we need to build governance models
and then there is the data governance work
in groups starting from the GDC with
our colleagues in Geneva UNCTAD and then
we have several other discussions on
this common data and data comments and I'd
like to ask all of you about this
vision how do you see data is data still
this set of files that we are
sharing or is data something bigger larger
bringing all the ecosystems from
that can brings the data valuation we are
talking about data curation all the
time but data valuation which is at the
end of the pipeline is also another piece
of the of the value chain that should be
into the discussion if I ask you to
describe this vision the challenges of the
governance policy across the entire
value chain Rebecca what do you think all
right thank you many that's that's a
question so at the end of the day data is
coming from people right it's about
human beings it's being used for human
beings otherwise what's the point so so
with Wikipedia we are being one of the
largest sources of training data for
basically all of the large language models
out there we're not asking for
compensation for the content itself the
content is Creative Commons
attribution licensed we have free APIs out
on the internet anybody can can use
the content but there are some challenges
here one is that with generative AI of
course we have this problem that that that
we heard about from Nambia and others
that large language models are taking
information and kind of stripping the
attribution out and then throwing in
hallucinations and making up sources and
you know we have another of problems right
so if you want information
information integrity if we want quality
data that is actually true right you need
attribution you need to be able to trace
provenance we have some common problems
there that are policy problems and and you
know regulation problems in in in
some sense we engage with the AI companies
about this and also with
governments when they're asking us you
know what should we do we're saying you
know don't do things that harm human
rights or harm human innovation but what
is going to be proactive as a vision for
what societies need in order to thrive
and we need data that is high quality that
is based on true information right
but then kind of going another layer of
the interdependency where is where's
the information on Wikipedia coming from
right it's not original content it's
coming from independent journalism
independent science independent research
from human beings WHO are doing work that
is sometimes challenging to powerful
entities that would like to promote a
different version of of different
narrative out there than what the what the
facts are showing which brings us
back to the previous panel we heard from
Guillermo several times about fundamental
human rights if we are not protecting the
human rights of the human beings WHO
are generating discovering reporting
curating and and and creating the
platforms and the software that enable
this to be hosted and transmitted and
protecting them then you know AI is going
to be producing propaganda and
hallucinate hallucinatory CRAP so it's
coming down to really basic fundamental
you know pre-internet principles of human
rights of protecting the people and
also ensuring that you know at at
Wikimedia our our policies our strategy
around AI is to always make sure that that
the tools that are being developed
are being done under control of of people
in service of people and of
course transparently and accountability
and accountability so this this is where
I think policy frameworks where where the
United Nations where this community
coming together can develop some standards
and help governments think not
only about how do we punish bad behavior
or protect you know some movie companies
intellectual property but what's the
positive vision of the world we want to
create for our people and how do we do
that and how do we work together to do
that thank you so much I'm sorry we still
have only three minutes no no I'm sorry
yeah yeah I mean we have some
administration
prerogative so I'm sorry for that but I
keep the same question for you in the
beer in in one minutes please yeah how do
you see this value chain governance
issues policies issues bringing the
openness inside of that value chain of
data well okay so in one minute you you
mentioned is data oil I think data is
like uranium you know it if used
incorrectly you have a set of problems
where yes you'd governance and policy
structures around it if you's
positively if you think about what's the
proactive vision I'll give just a
tidbit very quick example of something
we've we're building we've built one
minute one minute um so we are the
custodians of a digital public good
called common voice which is the world's
largest public participation open
speech data set 300 different languages
750, 000 contributors throughout the
world and is born of a very simple
observation which is you should be
able to innovate in your own language in
your own mother tongue and while we
can think that the market will incentivize
Spanish and English and
French probably not Flemish and Catalan
and Sindhi right so then we we built it
it recognizing and seeing the dramatic
success it's had and its application in
ways we can't even imagine we are now
taking those insights and building what
we're calling the Mozilla data collective
which is effectively a two-sided
marketplace for people WHO are building
these ethical wonderful data sets of
which common voice is just one example
putting them in a place with a governance
layer that says okay if you've created the
world's largest biodiversity data set
about the Amazon you should have a place
where you can go to say hi this data is
available to you nonprofit actor at this
price maybe free maybe CC zero license
which is what common voices under maybe
something else if you have this other
data set it's available in this way so the
data creator can provide it in a way
that's quite straightforward the data
consumer right now has a place they can
go to say you know when I'm building my AI
model I don't want to just have to
use whatever garbage data sets are
available to me on the online I can go
somewhere else where I have a reassurance
that it's well curated so
there's consent in how it's being
disclosed so there is now an infrastructure
for this kind of work to happen and so
thinking about what are the policy
incentives for something like this to to
exist how can we be engaging in
partnerships for this kind of
infrastructure and other infrastructure
solutions to incentivize the proactive
this to me is what's very exciting about
the future okay why my one minute's done
yeah speak like an auctioneer but I
think there is we have to have to echo
what was being said we have to have this
proactive vision of what we want to build
to serve human beings to actually
flourish and then with equal rigor and
excitement and focus have the
regulation and the governance to
incentivize the good and minimize the
bad thank you so much Masayuki from
government perspective when it's we
talked about governance policy so the
regarding the AI training data we don't
have a policy yet but we have found that
if we are discussing about AI training
data there would be the training data
validation data and test data and our
focus is about quality of test data
because the training data can be
including a garbage if there is no bias so
a random vendor would like to have
those data including a garbage data if
there is no bias and if those are used
and if those are trained everybody can use
those data through the prompt so
that our focus is the quality data
especially for the local language owners
I think those are the important effort and
direction as well and regarding data
ownership you mentioned I think culturally
shifting from the ownership
to the stewardship would be the hardest
barrier and we are trying to do those
are not a registration but also community
building and so what means
yeah thank you so much I'm out you'll do
it in one minute meaning in from
statistics perspective and I heard garbage
data bad quality data I know
about this issue in statistics I mean if
in the governance is there any
quality assurance what are the policies to
ensure the minimum quality inside of
what we are producing at least in Africa
yeah thank you so much so I mean on the
data qualities part I mean a lot of
African countries really also have their
quality insurance I mean established and
also been implemented as well but
here I would to come on the data commerce
aspect for instance that you
mentioned here that I mean to make it easy
and facilitate this aspect we have
been working with some partners you some
correct from other organization like
for instance what bank and I'm if and so
on checking this AI 2 AI tool for instance
a AI tool how they are currently using
official statistics data and we realize
that sometimes the response that we are
getting from this generative AI tool
sometimes are not really accurate right
when it comes to the official statistics
and why of this because mainly most of
these statistical data are not AI ready
right so it's very important now that in
the context of of this I mean AI area
not countries work to make their data
already and to make that data already
it's mainly based on standards right also
based also on on I mean upon that
principle as well using I mean standards
that are commonly used internationally
to make sure that those two long can be
using this data
consuming this data very easily to be so
that we also contribute on this data
comment as well efficiently that data from
all statistics can also be I mean
contributing on this vision on this vision
of having that a comment I mean
established thank you so much you've made
it we've made it again accept my
apologize audience accept my apologize we
have to wrap up because of
administration limits the occupation of
the room so I wish you all good evening
end of the day and a big clap for all the
panelists and the honorable guests
thank you
thank you to our last panel for that
powerful and important discussion on the
importance of interoperability and open
data could I kindly ask everyone to take
a seat and please be seated and we'll get
the next panel on the road thank you
okay before we dive into the next panel
role of open source in DPI I want to
kindly ask you all to take a minute to
fill out the feedback form which will be
showcased right here your feedback is
really important to us so we'll really
appreciate if you could fill out this
quick form now we turn to one of the most
transformative enablers of digital
corporation and public service delivery
digital public infrastructure we have a
quick keynote video from Shacil see
Marwala from United Nations University
distinguished guests esteemed colleagues
it is a privilege to contribute this
message to your discussions at the open
source week 2025 and to introduce
today's panel on the role of open source
in digital public infrastructure
while I regret that I cannot join you in
person I am pleased to share some brief
reflections with you as part of this
important gathering on open source and
digital cooperation the topic you are
exploring today is vital to shaping our
shared digital future as framed by the
principles of the global digital
compact adopted along with the pact for
the future last year open source data
can help us build a more inclusive
equitable and resilient digital real
digital public infrastructure is becoming
increasingly woven into the
fabric of our governments and societies
whether we are talking about digital
identification electronic payments or data
exchange frameworks these systems
increasingly influence how public services
are delivered our citizens
interact with the state and how value is
created and exchanged across society
this means that DPI is not neutral the way
it is designed build and govern
carries very real consequences for
inclusion citizen rights and ultimately
for national sovereignty this is where
open source has a unique and powerful
role to play by its very nature open
source for instance currency by enabling
public scrutiny and strengthening
democratic governance for public
institutions this can also mean lower
long-term costs and greater control over
core systems for local communities it
enables the adoption and evolution of
these technologies to reflect local needs
at the United Nations University we are
proud to be advancing the global
conversation and practice around open
source our mission is to address the
world's most pressing challenges through
collaborative research and education a
mission which compares us to ensure
that open technologies have the public
interest and promote sustainable
development this commitment is reflected
in the work of multiple UNU
institutes at UNU merit our collaboration
with UNICEF's office of
innovation shows how UN to UN cooperation
can translate open source
ideas into practical push together we have
developed resources that embed
digital public goods into higher education
helping instructors adapt
curricula to a rapidly evolving digital
landscape building on this UNU merit is
formalizing the partnership through a new
memorandum of understanding to
advance digital public goods knowledge
across the global south the first pilot
will launch in Kazakhstan at the Kazakh
British Technical University
supporting the creation of locally
grounded globally connected learning
pathways meanwhile UNU forum is helping
shape the global DPI agenda through its
loan in the UN's DPI safeguards initiative
it contributed to the
universal DPI safeguards framework
ensuring digital infrastructure uphold
rights and serves the public good this
work continues via the international
organizations consultative group and will
feature in a session with the
World Bank next week at UN headquarters
focused on operationalizing data
protection in DPI. UNU eGAF also leads two
regional initiatives in Africa one
supports inclusive public sector
transformation in North Africa the other
the EU funded safe digital boost Africa
program spends eight East African
countries and addresses digital government
he payments and cyber
security these efforts reflect UNU's
commitment to ensuring DPI serves
people support member state and promote
sustainable development particularly in
the regions that need it the most today's
panel offers an opportunity to build on
this work it brings together diverse
policies from across policy and
practice each with valuable insights on
how we can scale the adoption of open
source within DPI let us see this moment
to exchange ideas forging new
connections across sectors and regions and
ask bold questions in doing so we
can take another step towards a digital
future that is open inclusive and family
and cut in the public good thank you
now to finally get the panel going please
join me in welcoming our moderator
Ruth Kiga Ruth is a community and program
manager with an extensive
experience designing and implementing
capacity building programs that educate
and engage young Africans in open source
please welcome Ruth
hello everyone are you supposed to say hi
yeah I see a lot of hungry faces but I
think the UN budget increases every year
this year we had coffee so I think
next year we might have three don't so
let's look forward to that I also think
that the UN or that team doesn't really do
well with social media so we're going
to do a little bit of social media
activity please take out your phone take
yourself here we saw one sitting next to
you and posted on LinkedIn master done
anywhere you're more active in if
somebody's not taking itself with you then
they don't like you so
tag Omar
okay thank you thank you keep taking the
selfies thank you so much to the UN
or that team for inviting me once again to
speak they keep adding much
achievements to my resume so thank you as
governments around the world seek to
build inclusive secure and interpretable
digital public infrastructure open
source software as emerged as a
cornerstone of these efforts open standards
transparent governance and community
collaboration are key principles for
underpinning both open source and DPI the
global digital compact which I'm still
reading reinforces the importance of
shared digital systems and multi-stake
holder collaboration institutions such as
the global DPI summit the UN
General Assembly have all emphasized the
strategic importance of DPI in
achieving the SDGs as you all know where
yet to realize the full potential of
DPIs and that's why the UN keeps inviting
us every year to come have
conversations like this there's a need to
connect both the open source and DPI
ecosystems how can open source communities
and digital infrastructure
practitioners co-design systems that are
scalable secure and inclusive what
governance models funding strategies and
technical pathways and needed to
strengthen collaboration between these
domains so join me as I invite my stellar
lineup of panelists to talk about the role
of open source in digital public
infrastructure so I'll start with Mila
Abel Mila is the deputy director and
principal technologies at the Bilal
Melinda Gates Foundation and he's also a
chief architect of the Muja Loop software
and then I'll call on Adriana
grow the COSI of the Soviet Tech Agency I
also call on Gabrielle Colombro the
general manager of the not foundation
Europe
I'll call on Frank Gverry the chief
technology and portfolio officer kept
Gemini and lastly I'll call on Wolfgang
Gerring the fourth ambassador and
also lead at the Mercedes-Benz Tech
Innovation so you see we have really
awesome panelists and I think Wolfgang is
going to give me a message
okay thank you all for joining me today so
I think yeah we're really short on
time so we'll keep it very brief like I
said earlier to all of you so let's
start with the short round of a short
round of introductions could you also
briefly share how your organization is
engaging with open source and DPS I
think that's a poll that's supposed to
roll out I kind of forgot that part
the poll going to okay yeah so there'll be
a poll the audience will engage in
the so you can go to the pole and engage
so yeah let's start with you Nila greetings
well thank you for putting this together
today this is great the Gates Foundation
is working through open source in selected
markets to bring a lower cost
solution to markets that are interested in
sovereign solutions for DPI that is
a digital public infrastructure as opposed
to the traditional infrastructure
we might think about though for a moment
airports versus airlines airports are
public infrastructure they're public their
primary purpose is to bring
interoperability into lower the cost of
operation of airlines which bring
services to end customers but really
airlines can't work without airports and
airports are not of much value unless they
have airlines we want to see the
two things fit together and in digital
public infrastructure we're looking at
those things now in the digital realm and
we really say that if we think about
again the airport analogy that ecosystem
requires open standards a kind of
digital public good that's related to open
source we think about communications
the phraseology that's used between a
pilot when speaking to air traffic
control is standardized so are the
markings on the runway so that the
pilots know where they can go where they
must go and where they shouldn't go and
all of that together and those open
standards implemented in a repeated way
over time develop that interoperability
that base of interoperability in the
digital world we have the option to then
bring implementation of some of those
things together as well not to denature
the markets we believe innovation is an
important aspect of it but we really do
want to see the lowest layers of the of
this infrastructure as cooperation space
that where the it is all agreed this is
this has to happen and so we need to get
it right let's implement it at the lowest
possible cost so that innovation can occur
within the private sector and
for the time I'll leave it there thank you
I like that analogy I think in time
somebody asked me about DPI just impute
that airport and airline analogy so I
think I'll go to Adriana could you tell us
what so when take agency how the
intersect with open source and DPI yeah
and I can totally connect to the airport
example thank you for that I also gonna
steal that because I I wanted to address
and it's hard to address new points with
all the good things we heard and to an
audience that is really knowledgeable but
really stressed the point of
infrastructure has layers right and it's a
big word and I think addressing these
different layers of infrastructure and
addressing the complexity in this field
is very crucial so at the Southern Tech
Agency I put it very simply we focus on
the software that developers need to
develop software and we call that
infrastructure which is a different
understanding to what many year when we
talk about DPI and both things are
extremely important and exist at the
same time and we need to understand how
they are connected and that we need to
address them in different ways and sustain
them in different ways if we
want to get somewhere with open digital
infrastructure that is serving the
public's interest so the Southern Tech
Agency is quasi-public government
organization in Germany running since now
two and a half years investing by a
public procurement in maintaining digital
infrastructure in a way that it
serves openness and participation and
makes it possible for many different
participants to build software maintain
software innovate which is as we believe
crucial for better outcomes more
engagement and healthy competition and
innovation bringing us the results that we
need to achieve the SDGs new
business models whatever it is we desire
so that is our mission I also keep it
short thank you Gabriel first of all
thanks for having me here some
represent the Linux Foundation around the
European side of the business for
those of you are not familiar the Linux
Foundation stewards some of the largest
open source projects in terms of adoption
and you know we've provide
legal support we provide neutral
governance for public sector private
sector and individuals working together on
these projects and ultimately
fundraising to up to now fundamentally
more from the private sector but
increasing from the private sector that
then is used to gross these projects
pay maintainers and sort of maximize the
chance of success how it relates to DPI I
think is more similar to what Adriana said
you know probably you're familiar
with Linux but there are several other
sort of large building blocks of the
internet that run on projects you are the
better Linux Foundation whether it's
Kubernetes no JS PyTorch in the space of
AI so from an horizontal perspective
we're very aligned sort of to the idea of
infrastructure of shared technology
investment that runs effectively the
modern stacks but there's also another
angle which is maybe more aligned to
specific industries it's very sort of
near and dear to my heart I also run the
Fintech open source foundation which is
a sub foundation of the Linux Foundation
and it really brings together you know
large financial institutions to work in
open source we have similar efforts in
the energy sector in the telco sectors are
very much sort of critical
infrastructure that you know more or less
overlaps with sort of the concept of
DPIs thank you Frank so hello everyone so
very pleased also to be with you
today so I have the CTO of Capgemini and I
have the chance to lead the team of
40, 000 people on data on AI and we work a
lot for the public sector and for
critical national infrastructure so
obviously this initiative is very
important for us so the open source
ecosystem is important for Capgemini on
swimming subject the first one for all the
custom cloud and native applications
we are building for them so when it's
based on open source it's obviously
it's obviously what we are targeting and
also for the development of end-to-end
digital solutions I mean from applications
infrastructure security or
data platform and the third subjects are
very important for us it's related to
open sources the innovation dimension we
are working at this moment of time for
example on AI humanoids and so this is the
new era also very important it will
be also very important for DPI so we do
things that here again open source can
play a key role so we are very active in
the values open source communities and
we support the goof stack for example
thank you hoping someone wouldn't say
AI in our panel but we've had two hours of
going about AI but that's fine it's
coming don't worry yeah Wolfgang please
yeah thank you Ruth hello my name
is Wolfgang Erring and I lead the open
source program office at Mercedes-Benz
tech innovation and together with our
great team of FOS enthusiasts back home
we strive to transform Mercedes-Benz into
a company that fully embraces free and
open source software and we have in 2018
we published our FOS many FESTO
already and that's one of our cornerstones
it's a little bit similar to the
UN open source principles so I mean if you
do a simple web search you you can
find it I think we've come a long way so
just to give you an example of how
deeply FOS is already embedded in our
products our latest eClass model has up
to 3, 000 FOS components in it so I think
that's quite something now our core
brand values are safety security and
quality and our commitment to
innovation is deeply rooted in these
values and in turn nowadays innovation
in software happens mainly in open source
right so in conclusion Mercedes-Benz
has an unwavering commitment to FOS and I
dare say it's the foundation upon
which we build our future drive innovation
and collaboration across the
industry. Thank you so I'll start with you
middle you are closely involved with
developing and building up mojo loop which
is a foundational horizontal
digital system that enables essential
functions across society and it's also
like an open source product that used to
build DPIs can you explain to us how
do you open source and DPI fix together?
Yeah I think that the implementation of
DPI is a mix generally and I think in
specifically in our case of commercial
products and open source products they fit
together so that we use the best
available solutions in each spot if we
think about payments which is what
mojo loop is an implementation of series
of open standards but also a
series of closed ideas that were
implemented first in the private sector
and we think of as having good value that
can be brought forward in an
infrastructure context and that we would
think about the really the way that those
fit together is DPI requires an
implementation that because it is a
public infrastructure is traceable
sustainable and that is
supportable by the community that uses it
and in this case that community is
not just the end users but it's also those
those companies that are
facilitated by it so we think about in the
banking community you will have for
example and I might use the example of
Tanzania for their system they called
tips which is the Tanzania instant payment
system it represents a
collection of implementations done by the
Bank of Tanzania utilizing a
collection of open source and private
source implementation tools together
there's one tips but there are 50 some
financial institutions that are
connected to tips as its users the
governance of that solution then
requires that there be a collaboration
between the private sector and the
public sector the banks in charge very
clearly they're the regulator but at
the same time they really are pulling tips
together as a way to serve the
community of end users the consumers that
will actually pay each other and be
paid and they and to do that well they
need to be sure that they are
enabling the banking community to utilize
tips and that by the way extends to
non-bank financial institutions as well
which is a notable innovation that tips
is bringing to the solution yeah so I'll
move to Adriana
Germany has invested in a lot of open
source software through the Soviet tech
fund and which I'm a big fan of could you
share lessons cautionary tales with
countries that are now starting out how
can they you know build up governance
structures that best support open source
within the national DPI how much longer
do we have 1.5 minutes okay now I keep it
short because what we are trying to do
is providing a blueprint in the end
because we believe we're doing something
in a specific way that is rather new
actually trying to carve out a new role
for governments like what does a
government need to deliver in the 21st
century and we had the example with
airports we're always saying a few
tasks we decided to take care of
collectively right because we said that
makes them better we invest in
infrastructure when it's roads and bridges
and we need to find out how to do that in
a digital world so the blueprint we're
trying to create is like a new government
muscle where we're saying how can we
take care of this in a way that it's
sustainable and secure and supports the
values that we're having and then share it
because it doesn't help if just one
of us is doing it we need to do that
collectively this is why it's great
that we're talking at UN level about this
because it's a global task it
doesn't stop at borders it's not a
geographical topic it's connecting all
of us it's one shared ecosystem so I think
understanding this nature also
understanding the production logics of
open source software is really important
for governments and all actors if you want
to do good in this ecosystem because
the reality is also money doesn't solve
all problems unfortunately it can also
create wrong incentives it can increase
stress and pressure it can rip communities
apart it can do good in the short term but
harm in the long term in all of these
factors we need to take into account if we
want to channel support into our
shared digital infrastructure into open
source communities we also need to
understand the production logics in the
sense of governance models that's often
the most critical part and we cannot just
top down imply new models there to
communities that have worked in
decentralized volunteer manners for a
long long time because that's not going to
do any good at the same time we need
to find ways to avoid more volunteer
burnout more security issues arising
from a absolute increase also mentioning
again second time I think AI uptake in
software development that is creating a
lot of stress in the infrastructure
layer so all of this needs to be taken
into account it's a far too big
conversation to summarize in in a couple
of minutes but it's one that we should
have all together because the goodwill of
providing more support can backfire if
we don't take that into account maybe two
more additions I mentioned that
before we are also doing public
procurement we heard that on the previous
the one before panel it's not a nice to
have it's a must-have we need to
understand that open source is what we all
running on no matter what product it
is and it is the foundation and
understanding this is I think very
crucial understanding it not as a nice to
have and using a mindset that is not
funding per se as in giving money like
once in a while for a short time but
understanding that this is something that
needs continues investment and that
it's going to pay back in multiple ways is
another very important point and I
think that is something that we haven't
quite yet understood it's often still
seen outside of this room I'd say as a
niche topic so we need to to move away
from that because it won as our strategy
to develop software and another point
and I finished with that we heard actually
it's taking up most of the time to
maintain this ecosystem like we all
excited about innovation we had hackathons
it's really good we need that of course
but understanding that it's two sides of
the same coin and if we don't maintain we
will never get to innovate in a healthy
and sustainable way that really needs to
be nailed down in all rooms because
otherwise everyone here knows the famous
comic of dependency we're not going to
get far thank you Adriana has highlighted
that money does not solve all problems
but please still keep giving money so I'll
go to Gabriel most of the world
talking about running an open-source
software most of the world servers run on
Linux based software and the private
sector has you know call interest in
maintaining this open-source solutions
that power their services can you tell
us how the private and public sector as
well as like open source and proprietary
solutions complement each other sure and
likely Adriana stole most of my
founders so now it's good for timing it's
good timing but I think I think it's
important to sort of reiterate that you
know from different research that you
look at 80 to 90 to 95 percent of
proprietary solutions run on open
source are made out of open source so this
dualism of its proprietary versus
open source is not really such a partition
or a fragmentation and goes back
to what Miller was saying you know think
almost most of the times proprietary
solutions are basically the last mile that
deliver to either you know a private
sector or a public sector buyer and user
some cases it's hundred percent like
they're just providing legal and liability
and indemnity and support for
open-source software which actually makes
it easy for someone to purchase it I
mean I've seen it with the banks we were
starting to learn how to contribute to
open source but the procurement hasn't
corrupt yet so where do I sign like WHO's
gonna support this what am I gonna call if
you know this software goes down if
they haven't developed yet their internal
capacity and this is I think a lesson
that is easily applicable to governments
as well so I think goes back to
Adriana was saying almost as we were
sitting close to each other preparing that
this is not a uni-directional value chain
is an ecosystem in the sort of
biological sense of it and to me in terms
of how sort of the more I work
both with sort of a vertical there is very
regulated and so where the private
sector has to interact with the private
sector very closely as well as from the
Europe side as we see sort of geopolitical
digital sovereignty
conversations growing again intertwining
to me comes down to thinking about
open source as a effectively positive some
game like an open-source project
doesn't mean that if someone wins someone
else's loses we're seeing it in
our projects in the financial services
system banks can have ROI consulting
companies can provide support and
implementation services regulators can
see sort of transparently how the industry
sort of self-organizing and
complying to regulatory compliance so I
think it's about really figuring out
those projects that don't have you know
just technical value I don't you know
I'm a computer engineer so I don't want to
diminish that but it really starts
from sort of the business value to be able
to rally up sort of these long
term sustainability cycle thank you I
think that leads into the next question
for Frank what role should public private
partnerships play in maintaining
critical digital infrastructure are there
like shared standards or stewardship
models that can reduce you know
duplication break down silos and increase
global cooperation yes I will come back to
some of the points that were
mentioned before by Adriana also is that
so we do think that what is key is to
bridge a gap between the DPI and the open
source and to make sure that we have
sovereign transparent cost efficient
interoperable and innovative digital
services for citizens so on paper it looks
obvious and we must integrate
maximum open-source software but when we
are discussing with clients being
government or private companies the first
thing is you need to get the buy-in
from your clients so the clients must see
the open-source software project as
being successful so if it's a project
which is not supported it will go
nowhere so I think that the success of
open-source software project depends of
a combination of five factors the first
one we you need to get to strong
technical foundations honestly too many
open-source projects are weak today and
can be used directly for DPI the second
thing you need to get an active
community of developers if the community
is too small no way we can't use it
the third thing you need to get great
communication and branding as a fourth
subject you need to get a sustainable
project over time and assist over time
because you have you see a lot of
open-source software that that are getting
less and less support over time and the
last one which is most probably the
most important criteria for us you need to
get a large adoption buy-in
enterprise and government on this last
point you mentioned it for the adoption
enterprise and governments are ready to
adopt open-source software if they are
stable the first thing is it needs to be a
stable software it needs to it needs
also to get quality support and very often
to find a third party partner
committing to a service level agreement
because here we are speaking about
mission critical solutions so if you don't
have an SLA service level
agreement it is useless so that is the
reason why and it was mentioned I make
a quick before as a global system
integrator to deliver mission critical
solutions very often we integrate together
open-source software with open
governance but also open-source software
with closed governance and commercial
solutions and that's that's really a
blending of that that enable us to deliver
solutions that our clients can use so as
you can see we're very short on time and
I really want the UN to invite me back
next year so so we were going to hear
from Mr. Peter to talk about the use case
from the open-source business alliance
on private sector engagement so I'll just
roll it back
okay thank you so thanks again my name is
Peter Ganton I'm the founder and CEO
of UN event and we built an open-source
product for identity and access
management we work a lot with the public
sector and I'm also the chairman of the
board of the open-source business alliance
of Germany I'm working in open
source since more than 25 years and it's
truly great and very encouraging to see
how it is now really becoming a movement
to build the open infrastructures our
states and our economies need to give them
control over data and processes to
protect their freedom and to make them
innovative but I think and I've heard
this today a couple of times there's still
a lot of open questions how the
public and private sector can work
together we had this year on the panel
today too should the public sector build
itself or buy from the private sector
in general the public sector is not
producing the cast from it buys them from
Mercedes or from others and it's also not
building the buildings they need
themselves they are they procure private
companies to do so because it turns out
turns out that this is usually more
efficient however indifference to cast
and construction private vendors of
proprietary software cannot be easily
exchanged there are huge dependencies
quite often a lot of money has to be
spent often without clear value but the
answer to this problem I think should not
be that governments built their own
products and compete with successful
open-source companies that would even
thank you that would even impede an
ecosystem which just became successful it
would waste resources and it would
lower the chances to build world-class
open applications which also in the
long-term can compete with their
proprietary competitors to scale we need
products which can be used everywhere in
the public sector and the private
sector and in all places of the world that
is what made the big vendors of
proprietary software successful and it
will be very hard to compete with them
if we cannot use the synergies they are
using to make this possible I think the
private sector can fulfill a crucial role
it can build the powerful general
purpose open-source products which can be
used in the public sector and in the
private sector likewise unlike government
agencies the private sector is
directly incentivized to do so and to
scale therefore I think we really need a
new agreement about procurement of digital
goods between public and
private sector and I think two points are
crucial here first whenever something
is needed by the public sector that is
potentially also of use by other
administrations or in other places
government agencies should look for
commercial open-source software if not yet
available they should even encourage
the commercialization of solutions build
primarily for their own needs but
second at the same time the government
sector must not fail into new must not
fall into new dependencies and therefore
should really insist on buying real and
true open source of their and adhere to
open standards otherwise it will not
work it must ensure that it can source
from an open and competitive market
there are already great examples for this
model like the open desk project of
senders in Germany I'm sure that if this
model will be implemented more often
we will see huge investments in open-source
software scale open-source capacity in
the industry and at the same time can move
more efficiently and innovative to
open digital public infrastructure thanks
a lot thanks thank you mr. Peter and
because of time we have to leave I'm so
sorry to our panelists I'm going to
blame AI on this but yeah the next panel
has to come up I'm so sorry once
again thank you so much for sharing the
stage with me
thank you Ruth and to our panelist for
that very insightful panel okay we find
we've arrived at our final session of
today's program and what a day has it
been and we can finally start drinking now
soon soon soon I would like to
introduce Robert de Cosma director of
software heritage WHO has long championed
the preservation and accessibility of our
digital knowledge comments to set the
tone for this panel then will be joined by
our moderator Lucy Harris chief
operating officer for the digital public
good alliance WHO will guide us through
this dynamic conversation and WHO will
also make sure that we get our drinks on
time
okay well hi everybody so I am one of the
obstacles between you and the and the
final celebrations so we'll try to keep my
presentation short if this lights can
come up please that would be fantastic
okay since you are going to enter in
this last panel WHO is focused on
multilateral collaboration multilateral
cooperation organization I think it was an
opportunity for me to help set the
stage for this discussion by providing you
with some hard facts that is
important to see so if you can move
forward to the next slide for example
one of the first hard facts that we now
know since three years thanks to an
initiative by the French government is
that open source software is actually at
the core of all modern science in all
disciplines what you see here is actually
a picture of the open science monitoring
framework that has been put in place by
the French Ministry research that shows
that software is using no discipline
yes including in psychology in geographies
in social science in not just
physics of chemistry or computer science
in interesting point here is that this
initiative started in France but they
moved to the international level to
cooperation with UNESCO and you have this
open science monitoring framework going
here next slide in the next slide this is
a global analysis of 50 years of
software development across the world
seeing through the software edge of the
sky we will learn more about this a little
later on after these are hard facts they
show you that software development today
is a global undertaking there were
periods when Europe and or the US were
master of the world in software today if
you look over a third of software
developed worldwide open source software
comes from outside of Europe and the US
next slide please in the next slide you
can see because why do we need global
coordination the point is that we are
facing an explosive increase in the amount
of source code that is developed
worldwide this is another picture taken
from the sort of heritage archive that
shows how the original content developed
worldwide I don't have going to go the
time to go into technicalities you just
need to take my word for the moment this
is really the original content we removed
all duplicates goes by 100%
basically every two years so every two
years the amount of new open source
software doubles so this needs cooperation
coordination between all
among us if you can move to the rest
slides you will see another example the
programming language this is another hard
fact picture that we finally have
since a couple of months on the amount of
software which is developed using
different programming languages you may
not know this but I have been told by
linguists that there are over 7, 000 human
languages since human being have been
born you will be surprised that in 70
years we in computer science managed to
develop over 9, 000 programming languages
I hope we stop this game soon but in the
meanwhile you can see how this evolves
over time so there is a huge
complexity around us and this is a main
objective hard factor reason why we need
to coordinate global if you can move to
the next slides you will see how these
pictures have been taken this is not an
opinion this is a hard fact and is due
to the fact that 10 years ago with a group
of military motivated people we
started an initiative called software
heritage whose motivation goal objective
was to go out and collect every single
line of code either written by a human
being press serve it to avoid losing it
and make it easy to access study in the
evaluate so a catalog in archive but last
but not least a very large telescope
that allows us to explore the galaxy of
software development the images you
have seen before and actually the slide
will be online so you can check the hard
facts on the article research article
everything I'm a computer science after
all then are taken with this instrument if
you can move further to the next slide
you will see that this instrument actually
was designed as a one single
open nonprofit multi stakeholder
infrastructure designed to address the
needs of cultural heritage of industry of
research of public administration and
this is done at the beginning with the
support of India which is a national
research public research organization on
computer science in France in agreement
with UNESCO since 2017 this is a largest
archival source code in the world and
has been supported by a diverse set of
stakeholders so in some sense software
is also an example of multilateral
collaboration and coordination now if
you can move to the next picture this is a
first-time opportunity to show
another kind of picture that you can take
with this kind of telescope so the
first picture you have seen where picture
of the sky you see what is
evolution of software globally in the
world this is a picture of a specific
galaxy the united nation galaxy you will
see here the most the 40 most important
software to which united nation
contributed by analyzing in the archive
the amount of contribution to this
particular software you see on the left
the number of contribution the number of
contributor the number of projects the
period over which the contribution have
taken time and here you have a breakdown
of all the different UN organizations that
contributed to this kind of thing
why am I showing this to you because when
you need to take decision in the
future on where you invest what are the
different people contributed to a piece
of software you need hard evidence not
just things you read on a newspaper or
something like this you need facts and we
are helping trying to help you find
these facts moving forward I have 20
seconds left so in the last 20 seconds I
can tell you a bunch of things that I
would like to put in the table of for
the next panel a few weeks ago the French
president of the Republic in a
speech addressing the Sorbonne University
on the issue of attracting or
welcoming researchers that are going to
come to Europe mentioned the importance
of having infrastructure which are public
that are non-profit that are
essential to preserve knowledge for
everybody and he mentioned explicitly
software as a mechanism for resilience and
this is not just for France it is not
just for Europe it is a word for the world
but there are many other things we
need to do I mean how to find the standard
for identifying software
exactly and precisely how to address
cybersecurity how to address
transparency in AI I hear all of you using
the term ethics if I may say I'm
not very comfortable with ethics because
the notion of good and bad changes
depending on the country where we are I
prefer the notion of transparency that
has a very precise technique and
scientific definition so at least for
transparency we can go there and finally
what we try to do in the last year we
spent a lot of time going around the world
in the global south in the north
establishing connection and we could check
and verify that every single
country is confronted with exactly the
same problem open science cyber security
transparencies in AI they use a software
sharing or knowledge sharing
computation so this is a message I would
like to leave to you and this is a way
of opening the panel how can we work
together in a transparent way not by
inventing the wheel everybody in a
different country but to be building a
shared infrastructure and the service of
everyone thank you for your attention
sorry for having taken 30 seconds more
than expected thank you very much
thank you so much Roberto my name is Lucy
Harris I'm the COO of the digital
public goods Alliance and we are going to
be doing a lightning panel for the
last 15 20 minutes that we have here
because we are between you and a
reception that will run from six to eight
it's in the south dining room on the
fourth floor and we only have that six to
eight period so I invite all of the
panelists up for this last panel and we're
going to do it as a lightning talk
which I think is also an excellent
opportunity to keep the energy in the
room which after several hours and the
coffee is far behind you it's probably
all you have energy for so this is going
to be fantastic I'd like to welcome all
the panelists the stage thank you
wonderful as they're taking their seats
and for the sake of time I'm going to
introduce all of our panelists and I
think we also have a little poll to put up
well while I'm doing my
introductions so Nancy Norris is the
Bureau Chief of United Nations Center for
Trade Facilitation and Electronic Business
a body within the UN that
creates open source standards for
digitalization of trade and transport
processes see she's also acting an acting
executive lead the British
Columbia Ministry of Mining and Critical
Minerals. Sergio Gago is the CTO of
Cloudera a software company that provides
a hybrid data platform for
businesses to manage analyze and act on
data. Dirk Schroeder is the head of the
state chancery and Ministry of
Digitalization in Schleshving, Holstein
the northernmost state in Germany. Bell
for Fabio Garcia Hano is the former
Vice Minister of Digital Transformation in
Columbia. Prior to his role as Deputy
Minister he was Director of the Office of
Planning and Information Systems in
the District Secretary of Government in
Bogota. And Daniel Mazar is the City
Councillor for IT, Smart City Science
Research and Innovation and a member of
the Prague City Council. A quick round of
applause for our panelists.
We've only got three so potentially not
everyone made it up. This is the last
session of the day guys we're gonna work
with it. So luckily I have one
question for each of you to answer and
this is really around our topic which
is the role of open source and
facilitating digital collaboration. So
the question that I really want to
understand is how does open source
facilitate digital cooperation and what
needs to be in place to make open source
a truly valuable tool for this. So Nancy
I'm going to start with you from your
perspective creating and maintaining open
source standards as part of the UN.
What is the role of open standards in
facilitating digital cooperation?
Thank you. It's a pleasure to be here. So
from my perspective you heard already
from Demetri Marie Sien, our Deputy
Executive Secretary for UNECE. So I'll
build on his comments. UNC fact is a body
within the UN that creates standards
for trade facilitation and this means that
we have technical expertise both
from the IT side of the world and also
business. So trade processes as goods
flow around the world. We think that open
source technology has a huge role to
play here because as we're developing
these standards the technical underpinnings
of them are really code lists, computers
talking to one another and having a
definition for where a package is at at a
particular location around the world say
so that's a low code. Then also defining
sustainability characteristics of goods
as they move around the world and having
this in a standardized format is enabled
both by the IT and the technical
standardization and also a vocabulary
that describes and can be a standardized
way of describing all of these different
aspects for trade facilitation. So open
source is important to us for
multiple directions. We use open source
tools to create these standards and we
also create these standards to be open
source solutions. The nature of trade
systems is that they're inherently
decentralized. You have multiple different
actors all over the world sharing data
about a supply chain or a trade
process and so if you have a naturally
decentralized system like this you need
the cooperation of multiple actors WHO
don't necessarily talk to one each other
or trust each other inherently. So the
open source tooling and open source
ways of running a project are very
conducive to getting all of these
different actors to collaborate with one
another. The other aspect here is that if
you're creating a standard and maintaining
it as an open source solution
you are able to harness all of the
efficiency and expertise of an entire
community of global experts and if you
enable them to use the right tooling
they can contribute and help to create a
digital public good which is very much
in alignment with UN goals in this area.
Also we also see it as an opportunity for
interoperability if you're creating
standards in the open you have more
opportunity to work with other standard
setting bodies other experts
around the world having all of that
cohesion and alignment in the standards
world not all standards processes are free
to participate if you but UN
standards and the creation of them is done
openly and freely and we feel that
open source tools are a really important
part of that there we go thank you so
much Nancy. Let's go to Sergio next. So
Sergio you've got a different
perspective but it's the same question
thinking about from your perspective
thinking about data sovereignty and AI
principles how can open source build
global frameworks to facilitate digital
cooperation? Sorry absolutely so I think
in order to answer that question I need to
take all of you on a journey. So last
year we were talking here probably not in
the other room about how AI was
affecting DPI and data sharing and so on
but we barely we were barely talking
about AI agents and just early this week
we had the hackathon going on here in
this very room and these young people data
scientists were bifecoding
amazing applications in just a day and a
half build authentic full work in pieces
of software that could be part of this
very topic that institutions governments
and so on will be using as we move forward
so I would like to think about
this topic not about not even from the
angle of today but from the angle of the
future and the future could be something
as early as a few months from now it
doesn't have to be a decade where three
quarters of the workforce are actual
agents both in private companies and in
public institutions where we have a
earthquake in the job market as it is
happening today that's the elephant in
the room but that is where we're going we
have thousands of startups today
rushing into creating unique skills into
these systems that are going to be
able to replace many of the processes and
systems that we have today now what
does this have to do with what we're doing
today right now everyone has data
this has been the topic that we've been
discussing for decades since the early
days of business intelligence and machine
learning but data by itself and I'm
gonna say something controversial is
actually useless a data in order to be
useful needs to be discoverable needs to
be accessible by the right people and
by the right systems and used with the
right standards as Nancy was was
mentioning now in the past we talked about
AI systems having access to these
data and now we've been talking about what
that's open source for AI mean is
that open weights open training data and
so on all that has been discussed at
length today and in many other forums but
when it comes to agents we have
another dimension which are the skills the
abilities I'm gonna give you an
example what what I mean by this one very
clear example of public data is
financial statements right any public
company at least the company has all the
financial data if I read that financial
statement I will probably know whether
they make money or not but that's about it
because my financial knowledge is
limited now if I give it to my good friend
WHO's chief economic economy
economist at a company he would know very
well how to read that and both of us
know how to read but the insights that he
will get from that are much more
insightful than the ones that I can get
now imagine this future with agents
right so we have to think about open data
open standards open platforms all
those topics we've been talking about
through the whole day how and word that
data resides and one remark before on
commercial open source making sure that
we have the right SLAs and that we don't
have any modes to access our data so
we are free from any vendor effectively
and how do we build those skills that
are interoperable so for me the most
important thing on this conversation is
as we move into this brave new world where
there is some health care defense
detail ID or any of the other topics that
from a DPI perspective we need to
worry about what are the skills that these
agents that the systems will have
and how are we are we gonna share them
with the standards that already exist
today or at least there are a lot of
people trying to build those standards
whether it's NCP A to I and A to I and so
and so many others and access to
sovereign data that every country and
every citizen has to be able to access
control and modify according to the good
standards that we have created so far
Sergio thank you so much for that and I
feel like tying in the standards
conversation bringing in the skills
component we're going to come next to
Belfer WHO will be speaking through an
interpreter this question is calling on
your experience with digital
transformation in Colombia and Bogota
what is the role open source plays in
digital transformation across different
levels of government and you just turn on
open source a kid has a common honor
capitalized the historic and the same in a
little bit of the same thing to tell
you look as a little bit of the other is
what we believe the other is what we're
a compartio for total as community is
academic as in a different this university
is in a different this industrious in a
new detail as a like a little change
in low-end time it's also what we pray
what is our is a kiss so establish a
common I can't agree only a transgore a
tourist is perio the is a liver tank is
used to say you also want to know the same
thing that is a tenta illa pre-life is a
soon case is a roger's a finale the signal
in the only afford to know I'm in
the same as plant and though they killed
so what will be a very important to you
open source look is a part of a hundred
terminus de go here no is more important
it's a little bit as a little bit as
porque cuando a la mote de de logo here no
in a little so I think no look here I do
so many to fundamentalists last over a
knee a little over answer is a so it any a
little over answer like for macheon
get in a little go here no such as us you
know so I mean it is possible a ci're
look on a rami and tada open source no
you're trauma nada a ci're look when the
techno look here as well I can't agree
it's impossible if I establish a look is
you say it's a ci're a hanigra no sir
present a good stop it through in a land
you don't mean those as having to trace
and yes present all anti el con gracio
la repulica UN projecto el a soviet is
open source in el estado in non this
establish here el concepto de governanza
el concepto de sovereign here the del
ponto esta la techno look here oi esta su
ci'rei ento el tema fundamental de
lentel he's artificial okay mutual and
comparado coma lo que significo la rueera
lo que significo huego o lo que significo
las crittura ela la cultural mana eso a
lentel he's artificial el a cosas más
importantes and terminos de lo que sas
o ci'rei ento alrita nesos ultimos años
intermino de intel he's artificial
es que plante amo nueva mente que escentel
he's artificial she has a roja con
reminta de pon de open source el aunica
manera dea de esta la democrazia el aunica
manera pued esta le se una responza elidad
con nuestros ci'reanos de de la
partel govierno no tros plante amos que la
tengo lo hea como tal es una conquista
la manidad y como la tengo lo heas una
conquista la manidad es UN derecho la
sousia thank you so much I'll try to
shorten it a little bit but essentially
what mr. Belfort is saying is that the
technology was open throughout our
history until the 60s and the 70s and
after that it became like a closed box
and proprietary AI today is helping us or
forcing us to review that and give
access to the data again to the population
to the citizens of a country
the president gustavo negro petro pego the
president gustavo petro has sent a law
project to to their house of
representatives for voting and for
passing 23 years ago it's still in under
discussion it's still not approved but
now with the need for access to data and
to technology the government is urging
the house of representatives to pass again
to pass this law finally so that
the citizens will have access to the
technology and to the data in the
more transparent way through open-source
and I think that's that's pretty much it
thank you so much I'm now going to hand it
over to Daniel for our final thoughts
here so you have the challenge and the
honor of wrapping us up in the last two
minutes go ahead Daniel thanks a lot I am
I'm not to be here as a representative
of a local and region level I must say
that basically open-source software can
be a basic of not reinventing the wheel
and finding a common solution to common
problems now I come from Europe and you
might know that it is collected of 27 or
so nations that are rather small so giving
that well public governance is
driven by local laws and local rules and
bylaws the possibility to scale up the
solutions is limited and therefore
open-source is one way to cooperate between
the local levels horizontally and save
resources which means mainly saving
human effort now in Prague we have a
through a city company called YCT developed
several solutions for our problems like
the data platform golemio the citizen
portal city open data portal and they are
all available on GitHub and some have
already been transferred elsewhere and
used by others now the local cooperation
or horizontal collaboration between cities
and regions comes with its own
challenges and open-source is a challenge
of its own because from the point of
local and regional governance it is a
procurement problem and a task of asset
maintenance because software developed for
public money should be public source
and it needs to be maintained so if it
comes to well what one should ask from
governments national or or EU level or
similar please build the
infrastructure around the infrastructure
give us the open APIs that we can
follow and put it in the legislature that
sharing the resources between
public bodies is the task and the good
thing thank you what a perfect thing to
go out on thank you so much for all the
panelists you each brought a different
perspective to this conversation and we're
wrapping up 30 seconds ahead of time
before the AV team leaves and we're all
cut off thank you so much everyone thank
you so much Lucy and team thank you thank
you so much for wrapping that up
it was really fantastic I'm going to hand
it over to Omar to do some closing
remarks and then we can finally go and get
some drinks and could I kindly ask
colleagues to please check their gift bag
that you're received there is
accidentally a white bag in there that we
handed out with a mic so please if you
find it come find me and return it kindly
and to Omar please for closing
remarks hi everyone again thank you
everyone for coming I hope I learned a
lot I hope you to get to see different
perspective we made sure that all our
panel have a good balance of North South a
good balance of different views thank
you very much our last panel sorry we had
to run it through a bit but thank you
for everyone tomorrow tomorrow is our DP
ID we're very excited again to see you
it will be a lot more breakout than today
so we're gonna have two sessions of
breakout so please be here again as at the
front like today around by 830 so so
we can start on time here we're having
tomorrow opening ceremony with the with
some VIP so please make sure we are all
here on time and for please also make
sure to give us your feedback we'd love to
hear from you there are the papers
ensure you scan them and with that I think
we should go up to the from that
door there to the fourth floor there's the
elevator or there are stairs that
take us to the fourth floor and there we
can have a drink thank you
you